Title: Decisive: Guiding User Decisions with Optimal Preference Elicitation from Unstructured Documents

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.18122v1

Published Time: Tue, 21 Apr 2026 02:22:32 GMT

Number of Pages: 13

Markdown Content:
# DECISIVE : Guiding User Decisions with Optimal Preference Elicitation from Unstructured Documents 

Akriti Jain 1∗ Anish Mulay 2∗† Divyansh Verma 3∗† Aishani Pandey 4†

Pritika Ramu 5‡ Aparna Garimella 11Adobe Research, India 2IIT Madras 3IIT Roorkee 

> 4

IIIT Hyderabad 5University of Maryland, College Park 

{akritij, garimell}@adobe.com 

Abstract 

Decision-making is a cognitively intensive task that requires synthesizing relevant information from multiple unstructured sources, weighing competing factors, and incorporating subjec-tive user preferences. Existing methods, in-cluding large language models and traditional decision-support systems, fall short: they of-ten overwhelm users with information or fail to capture nuanced preferences accurately. We present DECISIVE , an interactive decision-making framework that combines document-grounded reasoning with Bayesian preference inference. Our approach grounds decisions in an objective option-scoring matrix extracted from source documents, while actively learn-ing a user’s latent preference vector through targeted elicitation. Users answer pairwise tradeoff questions adaptively selected to maxi-mize information gain over the final decision. This process converges efficiently, minimizing user effort while ensuring recommendations re-main transparent and personalized. Through extensive experiments, we demonstrate that our approach significantly outperforms both general-purpose LLMs and existing decision-making frameworks achieving up to 20% im-provement in decision accuracy over strong baselines across domains. 

1 Introduction 

Making informed decisions in high-stakes domains, such as selecting a suitable credit card, choosing an educational program, or defining a corporate strategy, requires synthesizing vast amounts of un-structured information from diverse document col-lections (e.g., financial disclosures, user reviews, technical reports). These decisions are inherently multi-objective, demanding that users weigh com-peting factors like cost versus quality or short-term 

> *Equal Contribution
> †Work done during internship at Adobe Research
> ‡Work done while at Adobe Research

Figure 1: Comparison of decision support approaches. 

Top : A generic LLM provides abstract advice (e.g., “choose a plan with low fees and high rewards”), forcing the user to manually verify which option fits. Bottom :DECISIVE grounds recommendations in document-extracted scores and actively elicits preferences through targeted tradeoff questions to find the optimal choice. 

gain versus long-term stability. While retrieving rel-evant information is a necessary first step, a sound decision-making process requires more than just locating passages. It requires the decision-relevant factors to be systematically extracted and consis-tently evaluated, enabling users to weigh trade-offs that align with their specific, often latent, goals. To manage such complexity, AI-powered deci-sion support is now widespread. In finance, models optimize investment portfolios (Li et al., 2024); in healthcare, they assist with clinical diagnosis (Nazi and Peng, 2024); and in strategic planning, they support complex reasoning (Changeux and Mon-

> arXiv:2604.18122v1 [cs.CL] 20 Apr 2026

tagnier, 2024). Large Language Models (LLMs) have transformed this landscape, offering power-ful capabilities to process the vast quantities of unstructured text central to these decisions. Yet despite this promise, current LLM-based solutions face significant limitations. Off-the-shelf LLMs typically act as “static information providers”, de-livering generic, one-shot analyses that fail to in-corporate the user’s unique context or latent pref-erences (Fig.1). Consequently, the cognitive bur-den of synthesis and alignment is forced back onto the human, who must interpret the AI’s output and manually map it to their personal objectives. This not only negates potential efficiency gains but also fosters mistrust in systems that remain opaque and misaligned with user goals. The failure to actively model user preferences is a critical gap; indeed, recent work identifies the user’s mental model as a key determinant for improving both the quality of and reliance on LLM-assisted de-cisions (Eigner and Händler, 2024). Conversely, recent frameworks like DeLLMa (Liu et al., 2024) and DecisionFlow (Chen et al., 2025) assume ide-alized scenarios where all relevant information is explicitly stated and a single objective governs the choice. This overlooks two critical realities of com-plex decision-making: (1) evidence is often scat-tered across multiple unstructured documents, and (2) the optimal choice depends heavily on user-specific constraints (e.g., budget limits or career goals) that are frequently latent and must be ac-tively elicited. We argue that effective decision support must explicitly decouple two distinct prob-lems. First, factual evaluation , where options are objectively scored against decision-relevant factors extracted from documents, a process that is con-stant across users. Second, preference modeling ,where the system actively learns the user’s subjec-tive priorities, a process unique to each individual. By separating objective evidence from subjective goals, we can build systems that are both robust and highly personalized. To this end, we introduce D ECISIVE , an interac-tive framework that combines document-grounded reasoning with Bayesian preference inference. D E- 

> CISIVE

first extracts an objective Option-Scoring Matrix from unstructured documents. It then em-ploys an active elicitation strategy, asking targeted tradeoff questions to refine a probabilistic model of the user’s preferences. This allows the system to converge on a high-utility recommendation. To summarize, our primary contributions are: 1. We introduce D ECISIVE , a framework that de-couples decision-making into objective docu-ment grounding (via an Option-Scoring Ma-trix) and subjective preference modeling. This separation allows for robust handling of multi-objective trade-offs. 2. We propose a decision-aware active elicitation strategy that selects questions to maximize in-formation gain over the final decision, ensuring efficient convergence with minimal user effort. 3. We curate a challenging, realistic benchmark spanning Finance, Education, and Hiring do-mains, requiring synthesis from unstructured documents. Extensive experiments show that DECISIVE significantly outperforms strong LLM baselines and structured frameworks in both accuracy and efficiency. 

2 Related Works 

2.1 Decision-making using LLMs 

Large Language Models (LLMs) have demon-strated significant potential as decision support tools across diverse fields like business (Changeux and Montagnier, 2024; Simchi-Levi et al., 2025), finance (Li et al., 2024; Yu et al., 2024), and medicine (Nazi and Peng, 2024; Li et al., 2025; Maity and Saikia, 2025; Kim et al., 2024; Gumilar et al., 2024; Foo et al., 2025). However, research indicates that direct prompting often yields poor results as problem complexity increases, as models may fixate on specific information without ade-quately balancing evidence or aligning with user goals. To address these limitations, several struc-tured frameworks have been proposed to ground LLM reasoning in formal theory. One prominent direction involves integrating decision theory and utility maximization. The DeLLMa framework (Liu et al., 2024) guides LLMs through a multi-step process involving state enumeration, probabilistic forecasting, and utility elicitation to identify decisions that maxi-mize expected utility. Building on this, Decision-Flow (Chen et al., 2025) transforms natural lan-guage scenarios into structured representations of actions, attributes, and constraints, inferring a la-tent utility function in a transparent manner. While these frameworks represent a significant step for-ward, they predominantly operate in idealized sce-narios with explicit information and single objec-tives (e.g., profit maximization). As discussed ear-lier, this simplifies the dual challenge of real-world decision-making and highlights the need for sys-tems that can both navigate complex information landscapes and actively elicit the nuanced, latent preferences necessary to resolve these trade-offs. The interactive and collaborative nature of decision-making is also a critical area of explo-ration. Systems like ChoiceMates (Park et al., 2025) use multi-agent conversational interactions to help users discover diverse perspectives and con-struct personalized preference spaces. They em-phasize keeping the user in the loop to prevent the loss of agency that often accompanies full automa-tion. However, purely conversational approaches often struggle to provide precise, opinionated rec-ommendations, yielding vague answers that fail to satisfy specific user needs (Park et al., 2025). Without explicit preference modeling, these sys-tems lack a mechanism to ensure recommendations reflect the user’s priorities rather than the model’s implicit tendencies (Jia et al., 2024). D ECISIVE ad-dresses these challenges by grounding decisions in real-world unstructured documents (for precision) while keeping the user in the loop to elicit latent preferences (for alignment). 

2.2 Preference Elicitation and Clarification Questions 

The ability of LLMs to resolve ambiguity through interaction is well-studied in literature. Early work focused on reactive clarification, where models were trained or prompted to identify underspec-ified queries and ask follow-up questions to re-solve implicit assumptions (Zhang and Choi, 2025; Chang, 2025). While effective for simple disam-biguation, these approaches often struggle in com-plex decision-making scenarios where the missing information (the user’s latent preference structure) is abstract and high-dimensional. Recent research has shifted towards proactive information gathering. Several benchmarks, such as InfoQuest (de Oliveira et al., 2025) and latent preference discovery tasks (Tsaknakis et al., 2025), have highlighted that off-the-shelf LLMs are inef-ficient at this process. They often fail to select the most informative questions, leading to long, unfo-cused interactions that result in preference dilution rather than convergence. To address this, newer methods employ specialized training paradigms (Andukuri et al., 2024; Dou and Liu, 2025) that use self-improvement and trajectory optimization to re-ward effective questioning strategies, while other works leverage diffusion-inspired denoising via se-quential funnel questions (Montazeralghaem et al., 2025). However, these approaches optimize for reconstructing a general user profile rather than re-solving the specific decision at hand. Consequently, they may spend interaction effort on preferences that do not differentiate the available options. A complementary direction, most relevant to our work, augments LLMs with explicit probabilistic reasoning. Foundational work in Bayesian pref-erence elicitation (Guo and Sanner, 2010) estab-lished multi-attribute preference learning with pair-wise comparison queries, and recent methods have built on this by combining LLMs with information-theoretic objectives: Active Preference Infer-ence (Piriyakulkij et al., 2024) selects questions that maximize entropy reduction, the OPEN frame-work (Handa et al., 2024) uses Bayesian Optimal Experimental Design to track user persona distribu-tions, and Austin et al. (2024) combine Bayesian optimization with LLM-based acquisition func-tions for natural language elicitation. However, these methods are often limited to binary Yes/No queries and frequently default to direct option com-parisons (e.g., “Do you prefer Option A or B?”), which assumes the user already understands the trade-offs the system is meant to surface. The Multi-Attribute Decision Making literature (Pu and Chen, 2005, 2008) reinforces this concern, show-ing that users construct preferences through inter-action rather than arriving with fixed ones, and that interactive tradeoff support can improve decision accuracy by up to 57%. D ECISIVE builds on these insights but introduces a key distinction: rather than reducing uncertainty over preferences alone, it optimizes for reducing uncertainty in the final deci-sion , focusing elicitation on the specific trade-offs that distinguish the top candidates. 

3 Dataset Curation 

Existing benchmarks such as MTA (Hu et al., 2024) and DeLLMa (Liu et al., 2024) frame tasks around a single objective (e.g., maximizing profit) and pro-vide contexts where all necessary information is explicitly stated. This sidesteps two core difficul-ties of real-world decisions: (1) locating relevant details scattered across multiple documents, and (2) weighing competing attributes (e.g., a university’s research rankings or program structure) against per-sonal constraints (e.g., tuition limits). To address this gap, we curate a dataset spanning three do-mains: Finance , Education , and Hiring . These correspond to multi-objective decisions commonly faced by knowledge workers, students, and HR pro-fessionals, respectively. As identified by prior sur-veys, these domains serve as representative settings for AI-assisted decision support, with applications in financial advising, educational planning, and career-related decision making (Ma et al., 2025; Albashrawi, 2025; Yin et al., 2025). Each domain requires synthesizing information across multiple documents and reasoning about trade-offs that de-pend on user-specific goals and constraints. 

3.1 Data Sourcing 

Curating coherent document collections at scale presents significant challenges. Scraping doc-uments from the web (e.g., tens of university brochures or loan policies) is impractical due to inconsistent formatting, access restrictions, and highly variable information granularity across sources. Instead, we adopt a hybrid sourcing strat-egy. For the Hiring domain, we use resumes from a public Kaggle dataset (Bhawal, 2021), also used by other works (Veldanda et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2024). In this dataset, resumes are organized by category of occupation (e.g., engineer, consultant). For each scenario, we randomly select 10 resumes from the relevant occupational category and gener-ate the decision question taking into account that particular role. For Finance and Education , we de-velop a synthetic generation pipeline grounded in manually scraped seed documents and decision sce-narios. These seeds, drawn from authentic sources (e.g., real loan brochures, university prospectuses), serve as few-shot examples that anchor the genera-tion in realistic structures and terminology. 

3.2 Synthetic Data Generation Pipeline Stage 1: Question and Schema Generation. 

We first manually curate a set of seed decision ques-tions representative of each domain. Using these as few-shot examples, we prompt GPT-4o to generate diverse decision scenarios (e.g., “Which graduate program best aligns with my career goals?”). A total of 500 questions are generated per domain (1,500 across three domains). For the Finance and Education domains, the model also produces a structured document schema along with the deci-sion question, specifying the necessary documents for making an informed decision, such as program borchures etc. Each scenario includes M =10 can-

> Figure 2: Overview of the data generation process.

didate options, deliberately increasing the deci-sion complexity beyond pre-existing benchmarks (which typically use 2-4 options) and ensuring that simple heuristics are insufficient. Since our pref-erence elicitation objective operates over factors rather than options, the framework scales naturally with M . We further verify that performance gener-alizes to smaller candidate sets through an ablation at M =5 (Appendix A.3). 

Stage 2: Context-Aware Document Synthesis. 

The second stage synthesizes the documents de-fined in the schema. To ensure intra-document consistency, the pipeline performs a hierarchical, context-aware generation process: first generating a structural blueprint, then sequentially producing content where each section is conditioned on prior sections, and finally refining the compiled docu-ment for stylistic uniformity (see Appendix A.1 for details). The output is a dataset where each instance consists of a decision question and a set of option documents. 

Validation. To ensure realism, we recruit three domain experts per field from a freelancing plat-form, 1 to validate whether the decision questions reflect scenarios encountered in professional prac-tice and whether the generated documents contain the information necessary to make an informed decision. They were compensated at a rate of $15/hour. Annotators also provide the key factors they would consider in such decisions, which in-forms our prompt design for automatic parameter extraction discussed in detail in Section 5.1. After 

> 1https://www.upwork.com

filtering, our final dataset comprises of 499 samples in Education, 491 in Finance, and 500 in Hiring, totaling to 1,490 decision scenarios. 

4 Problem Formulation 

Given a decision query q and a set of candidate options O = {o1, . . . , o M }, where each option is described by a collection of unstructured doc-uments D, our goal is to identify the option o∗

that best aligns with the user’s latent preferences. We assume the utility of an option depends on K

decision factors derived from the documents. We decompose the decision into two components: (1) Option-Scoring Matrix ( S): An M × K matrix where Sij quantifies the performance of option i on factor j. Derived directly from source documents, this matrix transforms unstructured text into a struc-tured, comparable representation of evidence for each option. (2) User Preference Vector ( w∗): A

K-dimensional vector where w∗ 

> j

reflects the user’s subjective importance for factor j. This vector captures the user’s unique trade-offs and priorities, which are unknown a priori and must be elicited through interaction. The recommended option is the one that maximizes the weighted utility: 

o∗ = arg max  

> i

(Sw ∗)i

S is document-derived and user-agnostic: it can be pre-computed once and remains constant across users, whereas w∗ is latent and must be elicited. This formulation cleanly separates factual eval-uation from preference modeling, allowing ro-bust decision-making even with complex, multi-objective trade-offs. 

5 Methodology 

Our methodology centers on a Bayesian model of user preferences that is iteratively refined using an active learning policy. This approach allows the system to intelligently explore the preference space and converge on a high-utility recommendation with minimal user effort. 

5.1 Parameter Extraction and Option-Scoring Matrix Construction 

Given a decision query q and documents D, an LLM (GPT-5) first extracts K decision-relevant factors F such as tuition cost or risk tolerance. K

is not fixed globally but is extracted per scenario, tailored to the specific decision question at hand. In practice, we observe an overall average of K=11.2 factors per scenario, with domain-level averages of 12.0 for Education (range 8-17), 13.4 for Finance (range 8-21), and 8.3 for Hiring (range 5-14). For each option-factor pair (oi, f j ), the sys-tem generates a qualitative assessment on an 8-point ordinal scale (“Very Low”, “Low”, “Low to Medium”, “Medium”, “Medium to High”, “High”, “High to Very High”, “Very High”) grounded in the source documents, which is then mapped to a numerical value in [0 , 1] to form the matrix S. This graded, comparative scoring is distinct from stan-dard binary relevance judgment (Upadhyay et al., 2024), as our task requires nuanced relative com-parison across options. To ensure robustness and mitigate individual model bias, we generate these scores using three distinct LLMs (GPT-5, Gemini-3-Pro, Claude-4.5-Sonnet) and combine them via median aggregation on the ordinal scale. 

5.2 Modeling User Preferences 

With S fixed, the system must discover the user’s la-tent preference vector w∗. A single LLM estimate of user preferences can be unreliable. To address this, we model uncertainty over preferences using a uniform Dirichlet prior ( αj = 1 ), the standard uninformative prior in Bayesian inference, which assumes no initial bias toward any particular pref-erence structure. We then sample P candidate pref-erence vectors {w(1) , . . . , w(P )} from this prior, each representing a plausible user “persona” with an equal initial likelihood weight π(p) = 1 /P .This particle-based approximation (Doucet and Jo-hansen, 2011; Arulampalam et al., 2002) allows us to tractably maintain and update a rich distri-bution over possible user preferences. This set of weighted personas represents our initial belief state about the user’s preferences. 

5.3 Interactive Preference Refinement 

To refine our belief state, the system interacts with the user through simple pairwise tradeoff questions. When a user indicates that factor a is preferred over factor b (fa ≻ fb), we perform a Bayesian update on the likelihoods of our sampled personas. The up-date reinforces personas consistent with the user’s feedback and down-weights those that are not. Im-portantly, inconsistent personas are down-weighted but retained, ensuring that an occasional noisy or contradictory user response does not destroy infor-mation but simply redistributes belief across the Figure 3: Overview of the D ECISIVE pipeline. The system first extracts K preference factors from documents and constructs the Option-Scoring Matrix S, which quantifies how each option performs on each factor. ADirichlet prior models uncertainty over the user’s preference weights, with particle samples representing plausible preference vectors. Decision-aware questions are adaptively selected to maximize information gain over the decision distribution . User responses trigger Bayesian updates until decision confidence exceeds a threshold. 

preference space. Formally, this is achieved using a sigmoid update rule: 

π(p) ← π(p) · σ



κ · (w(p) 

> a

− w(p) 

> b

)



where σ(·) is the sigmoid function and κ controls the sharpness of the update. After each interaction, the likelihoods are re-normalized. This iterative process gradually concentrates the probability mass on the subset of personas most consistent with the user’s cumulative responses. 

5.4 Decision-Aware Question Selection 

Not all questions are equally informative. To max-imize efficiency, we select questions that reduce uncertainty in the final decision , rather than just in the preference weights. We define the system’s current belief as a probability distribution χ ∈ RM

over the available options, where χi represents the probability that option i is optimal, marginalized over all sampled preference personas: 

χi =

> P

X

> p=1

π(p) · I



arg max  

> i′

(Sw (p))i′ = i



We quantify the uncertainty of this distribution us-ing its entropy H(χ). For each candidate question comparing factors a and b, we simulate both possi-ble user responses ( fa ≻ fb and fb ≻ fa) and com-pute the expected posterior entropy of the decision distribution. The system selects the question that maximizes the Expected Information Gain (EIG), defined as the reduction in decision entropy: EIG (a, b ) = H(χ) − Eresp [H(χ(resp ))] 

This formulation ensures the system focuses only on preference trade-offs that actually differentiate the top contenders, effectively ignoring factors that do not impact the final recommendation. 

5.5 Stopping and Recommendation 

Instead of asking a fixed number of questions, we employ a dynamic stopping criterion based on de-cision stability. The dialogue terminates when the confidence in the most likely option exceeds a threshold ( max i χi ≥ τ , with τ = 0 .85 ). Upon stopping, it recommends the option with the high-est expected utility under the final posterior belief: 

o∗ = arg max 

> iP

X

> p=1

π(p) 

> final

· (Sw (p))i

This ensures the final recommendation is grounded in both the objective evidence from the documents and the user’s interactively refined preferences. 

6 Experimental Setup 

6.1 Evaluation Protocol and Metrics 

For each decision scenario, we simulate user inter-actions by sampling ground-truth preference vec-tors w∗ from a symmetric Dirichlet distribution. This ensures diverse preference profiles across tri-als. The ground-truth decision is computed as 

o∗ = arg max i(Sw ∗)i. During interaction, a deter-ministic user simulator answers tradeoff questions by comparing the corresponding weights: given a question “ fa vs fb?”, it returns fa if w∗ 

> a

> w ∗ 

> b

, else 

fb. For our method, we use P = 500 preference personas sampled from the same Dirichlet prior, which our ablation study (Sec. 7.1) shows provides a strong accuracy-efficiency trade-off. Our evaluation focuses on three aspects: deci-sion accuracy, ranking quality, and interaction ef-ficiency. For decision accuracy, we measure both 

Top-1 Accuracy (percentage of times the top rec-ommendation matches ground truth) and Top-2 Ac-curacy , also known as Hit Rate@2, (ground truth appears in top two). For ranking quality, we use 

NDCG@3 and Mean Reciprocal Rank (MRR) . For efficiency, we measure Average Questions asked before reaching a decision, which serves as a proxy for user effort. 

6.2 Baselines 

We use two categories of baselines: 

Decision Frameworks. We compare against three recent works: two frameworks for structured decision-making and one for interactive preference elicitation. DeLLMa (Liu et al., 2024): A multi-step reasoning framework that optimizes decisions under uncertainty. We adapt it to our setting by providing the ground-truth preference profile w∗

as part of the context. DecisionFlow (Chen et al., 2025): A system that structures decisions by mod-eling actions and attributes. Similar to DeLLMa, it is provided with the ground-truth preference profile. 

Active Preference Inference (Piriyakulkij et al., 2024): An interactive method that enables an LLM to ask questions to infer user preferences. Like our method, it starts without knowledge of w∗ and must elicit it through dialogue. 

Prompting Baselines. These baselines assess the capability of LLMs (GPT-4o) to solve the task di-rectly with varying degrees of assistance. LLM-Direct (B1): A single-shot baseline that receives all inputs (documents, decision question, extracted parameters, and the option-scoring matrix, along with the ground-truth user preference vector w∗). It is prompted to directly output its recommended decision. LLM-CoT (B2): Identical to B1 but utilizes Chain-of-Thought (CoT) prompting to en-courage reasoning before the final decision. LLM-Structured Dialogue (B3): An interactive baseline where the LLM does not receive w∗. Instead, it must discover user preferences by asking up to 10 yes/no questions before making a final recommen-dation. This mirrors the setting of our method but relies on the LLM’s implicit ability to infer pref-erences. LLM-Free Dialogue (B4): Similar to B3 but the LLM decides what questions to ask, how many, and when to stop. This tests whether unconstrained dialogue improves preference infer-ence. Exact prompts for all baselines are provided in Appendix A.2. 

7 Results and Discussion 

Performance vs. Prompting Methods. Given the ground-truth preference vector, LLM baselines (B1, B2) perform reasonably well, achieving 62 -67% 

accuracy on Education and Finance, and ∼87% 

on the Hiring domain where candidate differen-tiations are more apparent (Table 1). That said, their accuracy is capped by the need to reason over a 10 × K scoring matrix (where K ≈ 11 ) and compute weighted preference combinations, which remains challenging due to known LLM limita-tions in multi-step numerical reasoning. When pref-erences are unknown (B3, B4), performance col-lapses across all domains ( 9-30% ), confirming that LLMs struggle to implicitly infer and track user preferences through dialogue (Zhao et al., 2025; Tsaknakis et al., 2025). D ECISIVE addresses this by offloading preference tracking to an explicit Bayesian model, achieving ∼79% on Education and Finance, and 90% on Hiring, consistently out-performing the fully-informed baselines. 

Performance vs. Decision Frameworks. Existing structured frameworks struggle on our benchmark. DeLLMa and DecisionFlow achieve only 9-28% accuracy despite being provided with the ground-truth preference profile. These frameworks assume a simplified decision structure where a single met-ric dominates, reducing the decision to a direct optimization problem. Our benchmark, by contrast, requires reasoning over multi-objective trade-offs where users must balance competing factors. Ac-Method Dialogue? Top-1 Acc. Top-2 Acc. NDCG@3 MRR Avg. Qs Education Domain 

DECISION FRAMEWORKS 

DeLLMa ✗ 28.1 44.3 0.733 0.480 –DecisionFlow ✗ 20.2 34.3 0.706 0.403 –Active Pref. Inference ✓ 13.0 25.9 0.679 0.336 9.7 PROMPTING BASELINES 

LLM-Direct (B1) ✗ 64.8 82.4 0.799 0.782 –LLM-CoT (B2) ✗ 65.5 83.5 0.804 0.786 –LLM-Structured Dialogue (B3) ✓ 9.4 22.2 0.225 0.302 4.7 LLM-Free Dialogue (B4) ✓ 19.4 34.7 0.345 0.398 2.8 

DECISIVE (Ours) ✓ 78.8 91.6 0.893 0.879 5.1 

Finance Domain 

DECISION FRAMEWORKS 

DeLLMa ✗ 24.0 39.3 0.719 0.446 –DecisionFlow ✗ 17.1 30.1 0.694 0.373 –Active Pref. Inference ✓ 9.8 18.9 0.667 0.276 9.7 PROMPTING BASELINES 

LLM-Direct (B1) ✗ 62.3 83.5 0.793 0.773 –LLM-CoT (B2) ✗ 67.0 85.5 0.827 0.803 –LLM-Structured Dialogue (B3) ✓ 13.4 26.3 0.265 0.336 4.1 LLM-Free Dialogue (B4) ✓ 20.2 35.2 0.364 0.410 2.3 

DECISIVE (Ours) ✓ 79.0 91.6 0.887 0.893 6.1 

Hiring Domain 

DECISION FRAMEWORKS 

DeLLMa ✗ 9.8 20.0 0.667 0.288 –DecisionFlow ✗ 9.2 20.4 0.665 0.292 –Active Pref. Inference ✓ 32.0 56.6 0.749 0.554 7.5 PROMPTING BASELINES 

LLM-Direct (B1) ✗ 87.2 97.2 0.942 0.931 –LLM-CoT (B2) ✗ 87.8 97.8 0.949 0.935 –LLM-Structured Dialogue (B3) ✓ 11.4 21.8 0.229 0.303 6.9 LLM-Free Dialogue (B4) ✓ 31.6 40.6 0.416 0.472 2.4 

DECISIVE (Ours) ✓ 90.2 97.6 0.958 0.947 1.9 

Table 1: Performance comparison on Education, Finance, and Hiring domains. We compare D ECISIVE against LLM baselines and existing decision-making frameworks. The “Dialogue” column indicates whether the method interactively elicits preferences from the user. Green highlights best performance; Red highlights second-best. 

tive Preference Inference, the only other interactive method, shows highly variable performance (10-32% across domains), highlighting the limitations of generic entropy-based question selection. Our 

decision-aware strategy, which focuses on factors that differentiate the top options, yields more con-sistent and substantially higher accuracy. 

7.1 Ablation Studies Effect of Number of Preference Profiles. We analyze how the number of sampled preference profiles ( P ) affects accuracy and inference time (Table 2). P can be seen as a resolution parameter for our Monte Carlo estimator, where higher values yield a finer-grained approximation of the poste-rior. Accuracy improves steadily as P increases: from 66.9% at P = 10 to 82.7% at P = 500 . Be-yond this point, gains become marginal (83.9% at 

P = 2000 ) while inference time continues to grow, validating that the EIG estimates at P = 500 are stable enough to select effective questions.                          

> Profiles ( P)Top-1 Acc. Top-2 Acc. Time (s) Avg. Qs
> 10 66.9 84.5 0.021 2.41 100 77.5 89.5 0.086 3.23 500 82.7 93.7 0.533 4.24 1000 82.9 92.6 0.849 4.01 2000 83.9 93.4 1.289 4.54

Table 2: Effect of number of preference profiles on ac-curacy and inference time averaged across all domains. 

We use P = 500 for our main experiments, which achieves strong accuracy in under 600ms per scenario averaged across all domains. 

Robustness to Noisy Responses. To validate ro-bustness to inconsistent user responses, we con-duct an ablation using a Bradley-Terry response model where the simulated user occasionally gives inconsistent answers. We compare deterministic responses against noisy responses (temperature = 0.05) across all three domains (Table 3).                                           

> Temp Domain Top-1 Top-2 NDCG@3 MRR Avg Qs
> None Education 78.8 91.6 0.893 0.879 5.1 None Finance 79.0 91.6 0.887 0.861 6.1 None Hiring 90.2 97.8 0.958 0.947 1.9 0.05 Education 76.6 91.0 0.881 0.866 5.5 0.05 Finance 76.8 90.4 0.880 0.861 6.2 0.05 Hiring 89.6 97.4 0.955 0.943 1.8

Table 3: Noise robustness ablation. Performance un-der deterministic (Temp=None) vs. noisy (Temp=0.05) Bradley-Terry user responses. 

Performance remains largely stable under noise: average Top-1 drops only ∼2-2.5% and Top-2 drops ∼1%, with Hiring remaining particularly ro-bust. These results confirm that even when user re-sponses deviate from the model’s assumptions, the soft reweighting mechanism prevents catastrophic information loss. 

Extensibility to Nuanced Responses. A key ad-vantage of our probabilistic formulation is its ex-tensibility to nuanced user feedback. Because we model preferences as distributions over weight vectors, the framework can naturally accommo-date responses beyond simple binary choices. For instance, when a user indicates two factors are 

equally important or they don’t have any strong preference for either (neutral), the update rule can preserve the prior over those factors. When both 

are highly valued, both can be upweighted propor-tionally. This flexibility is not possible in methods like Active Preference Inference, which rely on hard binary elimination. 

7.2 Computational Efficiency Question Efficiency. DECISIVE requires only 5-6 questions on average to reach a confident decision in Education and Finance, and under 2 questions in Hiring where candidates are more clearly differen-tiated. This is fewer than Active Preference Infer-ence ( ∼7.5-9.7 questions) and comparable to B3 (∼4-7 questions), but with substantially higher ac-curacy. Our dynamic stopping criterion terminates the dialogue only when the decision distribution 

is confident, avoiding wasted effort on preferences that do not impact the final choice. 

LLM Call Efficiency. DecisionFlow’s multi-step pipeline (extraction, attribute mapping, weight computation per option-attribute pair) requires dozens of LLM calls per scenario. DeLLMa and the dialogue baselines (B3, B4, Active Preference) each require 7-10 calls. In contrast, D ECISIVE 

requires LLM calls only for initial parameter ex-traction and Option-Scoring Matrix construction. The subsequent Bayesian inference and question selection phases are purely computational, requir-ing zero LLM calls during user interaction. This design makes our approach significantly more effi-cient and cost-effective at inference time. 

8 Conclusion 

We present D ECISIVE , a framework that transforms the passive retrieval of unstructured information into an active, personalized decision-making pro-cess. By explicitly decoupling factual evidence extraction from subjective preference modeling, our approach addresses the twin challenges of in-formation overload and preference ambiguity. Our results reveal three key findings: (1) Structured preference integration significantly improves accu-racy over text-based reasoning. (2) Dialogue alone is insufficient for preference discovery without ex-plicit state tracking. (3) Decision-aware elicitation enables efficient convergence with fewer questions than entropy-based methods. We believe D ECI - 

> SIVE

represents a step toward next-generation deci-sion engines that do not merely present information, but actively collaborate with users to assist them in complex, real-world decision-making scenarios. 

Limitations 

Our framework relies on the quality of the Option-Scoring Matrix, which depends on the extraction capabilities of the underlying LLM. Errors or hal-lucinations in scoring can propagate to the final de-cision; we mitigate this by aggregating scores from multiple models, but residual noise may still persist. Additionally, our current utility model assumes that decision factors are independent. Real-world pref-erences can exhibit interdependencies (e.g., a user might prioritize quality only if price falls below a certain threshold), which a linear model may not fully capture. The framework also extracts a fixed set of K factors per scenario; when users have goals that fall outside the extracted factors (e.g., personal connections or emotional consider-ations not reflected in documents), the system’s recommendations may not fully capture their pref-erences. Finally, our evaluation uses simulated users with known ground-truth preferences. While we validate robustness under noisy responses via a Bradley-Terry ablation (Section 7.1),aspects such as usability and user satisfaction remain to be vali-dated through human studies. Ethics Statement 

We recognize that automated decision support, par-ticularly in high-stakes domains like hiring, finance, and education, carries significant ethical responsi-bilities. D ECISIVE is designed as an assistive tool to augment, not replace, human agency. By explic-itly separating objective evidence extraction from subjective preference modeling, our framework aims to increase transparency and allow users to un-derstand the basis of recommendations. However, we acknowledge that the underlying LLMs used for option scoring may exhibit latent biases, which could propagate to the decision process. While we mitigate this by aggregating scores across multiple models, users should interpret recommendations as data-driven suggestions rather than definitive judgments. Furthermore, all data used in our exper-iments is either synthetically generated or sourced from public, anonymized repositories (e.g., Kaggle resumes), ensuring that no private individual data was compromised. 

References 

Mousa Albashrawi. 2025. Generative ai for decision-making: A multidisciplinary perspective. Journal of Innovation & Knowledge , 10(4):100751. Chinmaya Andukuri, Jan-Philipp Fränken, Tobias Ger-stenberg, and Noah D. Goodman. 2024. Star-gate: Teaching language models to ask clarifying ques-tions. M. Sanjeev Arulampalam, Simon Maskell, Neil J. Gor-don, and Tim Clapp. 2002. A tutorial on particle fil-ters for online nonlinear/non-gaussian bayesian track-ing. IEEE Trans. Signal Process. , 50:174–188. David Austin, Anton Korikov, Armin Toroghi, and Scott Sanner. 2024. Bayesian optimization with llm-based acquisition functions for natural language preference elicitation. In Proceedings of the 18th ACM Confer-ence on Recommender Systems , RecSys ’24, page 74–83, New York, NY, USA. Association for Com-puting Machinery. Snehaan Bhawal. 2021. Resume dataset. Shane Chang. 2025. Teaching AI to Clarify: Handling Assumptions and Ambiguity in Language Models. Alexander Changeux and Stephen Montagnier. 2024. Strategic decision-making support using large lan-guage models (llms). Management Journal for Ad-vanced Research , 4(4):102–108. Xiusi Chen, Shanyong Wang, Cheng Qian, Hongru Wang, Peixuan Han, and Heng Ji. 2025. Decision-flow: Advancing large language model as principled decision maker. Bryan L. M. de Oliveira, Luana G. B. Martins, Bruno Brandão, and Luckeciano C. Melo. 2025. Infoquest: Evaluating multi-turn dialogue agents for open-ended conversations with hidden context. Yulin Dou and Jiangming Liu. 2025. To-gate: Clarify-ing questions and summarizing responses with trajec-tory optimization for eliciting human preference. Arnaud Doucet and Adam M. Johansen. 2011. A tuto-rial on particle filtering and smoothing : fiteen years later. In Dan Crisan and Boris Rozovskii, editors, 

The Oxford handbook of nonlinear filtering , Oxford handbooks in mathematics, pages 656–705. Oxford University Press, Oxford ; N.Y. Eva Eigner and Thorsten Händler. 2024. Determinants of llm-assisted decision-making. Charisse Foo, Pin Sym Foong, Camille Nadal, Natasha Ureyang, Thant Naylin, and Gerald Choon Huat Koh. 2025. The benefits and risks of llms for facilitat-ing medical decision-making among laypersons. In 

Proceedings of the 2025 ACM Designing Interactive Systems Conference , DIS ’25, page 3173–3191, New York, NY, USA. Association for Computing Machin-ery. Khanisyah Erza Gumilar, Birama R. Indraprasta, Ach Salman Faridzi, Bagus M. Wibowo, Aditya Herlambang, Eccita Rahestyningtyas, Budi Irawan, Zulkarnain Tambunan, Ahmad Fadhli Bustomi, Bagus Ngurah Brahmantara, Zih-Ying Yu, Yu-Cheng Hsu, Herlangga Pramuditya, Very Great E. Putra, Hari Nugroho, Pungky Mulawardhana, Brahmana A. Tjokroprawiro, Tri Hedianto, Ibrahim H. Ibrahim, Jingshan Huang, Dongqi Li, Chien-Hsing Lu, Jer-Yen Yang, Li-Na Liao, and Ming Tan. 2024. Assess-ment of large language models (llms) in decision-making support for gynecologic oncology. Com-putational and Structural Biotechnology Journal ,23:4019–4026. Shengbo Guo and Scott Sanner. 2010. Real-time multi-attribute bayesian preference elicitation with pairwise comparison queries. In Proceedings of the Thirteenth International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics , volume 9 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 289–296, Chia Laguna Resort, Sardinia, Italy. PMLR. Kunal Handa, Yarin Gal, Ellie Pavlick, Noah Good-man, Jacob Andreas, Alex Tamkin, and Belinda Z. Li. 2024. Bayesian preference elicitation with language models. Brian Hu, Bill Ray, Alice Leung, Amy Summerville, David Joy, Christopher Funk, and Arslan Basharat. 2024. Language models are alignable decision-makers: Dataset and application to the medical triage domain. Jingru Jia, Zehua Yuan, Junhao Pan, Paul E. McNamara, and Deming Chen. 2024. Decision-making behav-ior evaluation framework for llms under uncertain context. Yubin Kim, Chanwoo Park, Hyewon Jeong, Yik Siu Chan, Xuhai Xu, Daniel McDuff, Hyeonhoon Lee, Marzyeh Ghassemi, Cynthia Breazeal, and Hae Won Park. 2024. Mdagents: An adaptive collaboration of llms for medical decision-making. Haohang Li, Yupeng Cao, Yangyang Yu, Shashid-har Reddy Javaji, Zhiyang Deng, Yueru He, Yuechen Jiang, Zining Zhu, Koduvayur Subbalakshmi, Guojun Xiong, Jimin Huang, Lingfei Qian, Xueqing Peng, Qianqian Xie, and Jordan W. Suchow. 2024. Investor-bench: A benchmark for financial decision-making tasks with llm-based agent. Jia Li, Zichun Zhou, Han Lyu, and Zhenchang Wang. 2025. Large language models-powered clinical deci-sion support: enhancing or replacing human exper-tise? Intelligent Medicine , 5(1):1–4. Ollie Liu, Deqing Fu, Dani Yogatama, and Willie Neiswanger. 2024. Dellma: Decision making un-der uncertainty with large language models. Shuai Ma, Qiaoyi Chen, Xinru Wang, Chengbo Zheng, Zhenhui Peng, Ming Yin, and Xiaojuan Ma. 2025. Towards human-ai deliberation: Design and evalua-tion of llm-empowered deliberative ai for ai-assisted decision-making. In Proceedings of the 2025 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Sys-tems , CHI ’25, New York, NY, USA. Association for Computing Machinery. S. Maity and M. J. Saikia. 2025. Large language models in healthcare and medical applications: A review. 

Bioengineering (Basel) , 12(6):631. Ali Montazeralghaem, Guy Tennenholtz, Craig Boutilier, and Ofer Meshi. 2025. Asking clarify-ing questions for preference elicitation with large language models. Zabir Al Nazi and Wei Peng. 2024. Large language models in healthcare and medical domain: A review. Jeongeon Park, Bryan Min, Kihoon Son, Jean Y. Song, Xiaojuan Ma, and Juho Kim. 2025. Choicemates: Supporting unfamiliar online decision-making with multi-agent conversational interactions. Wasu Top Piriyakulkij, Volodymyr Kuleshov, and Kevin Ellis. 2024. Active preference inference using lan-guage models and probabilistic reasoning. Pearl Pu and Li Chen. 2005. Integrating tradeoff sup-port in product search tools for e-commerce sites. In Proceedings of the 6th ACM Conference on Elec-tronic Commerce , EC ’05, page 269–278, New York, NY, USA. Association for Computing Machinery. Pearl Pu and Li Chen. 2008. User-involved preference elicitation for product search and recommender sys-tems. AI Mag. , 29(4):93–103. David Simchi-Levi, Konstantina Mellou, Ishai Menache, and Jeevan Pathuri. 2025. Large language models for supply chain decisions. Ioannis Tsaknakis, Bingqing Song, Shuyu Gan, Dongyeop Kang, Alfredo Garcia, Gaowen Liu, Charles Fleming, and Mingyi Hong. 2025. Do llms recognize your latent preferences? a benchmark for latent information discovery in personalized interac-tion. Shivani Upadhyay, Ronak Pradeep, Nandan Thakur, Nick Craswell, and Jimmy Lin. 2024. Umbrela: Um-brela is the (open-source reproduction of the) bing relevance assessor. Akshaj Kumar Veldanda, Fabian Grob, Shailja Thakur, Hammond Pearce, Benjamin Tan, Ramesh Karri, and Siddharth Garg. 2023. Are emily and greg still more employable than lakisha and jamal? investigating algorithmic hiring bias in the era of chatgpt. Ze Wang, Zekun Wu, Xin Guan, Michael Thaler, Adri-ano Koshiyama, Skylar Lu, Sachin Beepath, Ediz Ertekin, and Maria Perez-Ortiz. 2024. JobFair: A framework for benchmarking gender hiring bias in large language models. In Findings of the Associa-tion for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2024 ,pages 3227–3246, Miami, Florida, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics. Shi Yin, Raiha Imran, Kifayat Ullah, Zeeshan Ali, and Izatmand Haleemzai. 2025. Responsible AI in stu-dent management: preventing misdecision in career choice of university students under inaccurate guid-ance. Scientific Reports , 15(1):38177. Yangyang Yu, Zhiyuan Yao, Haohang Li, Zhiyang Deng, Yupeng Cao, Zhi Chen, Jordan W. Suchow, Rong Liu, Zhenyu Cui, Zhaozhuo Xu, Denghui Zhang, Kodu-vayur Subbalakshmi, Guojun Xiong, Yueru He, Jimin Huang, Dong Li, and Qianqian Xie. 2024. Fincon: A synthesized llm multi-agent system with conceptual verbal reinforcement for enhanced financial decision making. Michael JQ Zhang and Eunsol Choi. 2025. Clarify when necessary: Resolving ambiguity through in-teraction with LMs. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: NAACL 2025 , pages 5526–5543, Albuquerque, New Mexico. Association for Computational Linguistics. Siyan Zhao, Mingyi Hong, Yang Liu, Devamanyu Haz-arika, and Kaixiang Lin. 2025. Do llms recognize your preferences? evaluating personalized preference following in llms. 

A Appendix 

A.1 Document Generation Pipeline Details 

Our context-aware document synthesis (Stage 2) proceeds in three steps for each document: 1. Blueprint Generation: The system generates a hierarchical JSON blueprint outlining the docu-ment’s structure, including its sections and sub-sections (e.g., Program Overview, Fee Structure, Career Prospects for a university prospectus). 2. Sequential Content Generation: Content is generated section by section, where each new section is explicitly conditioned on all previ-ously generated sections. This sequential condi-tioning maintains factual consistency (e.g., en-suring fee amounts mentioned in one section match those in another) and stylistic coherence across the document. 3. Compilation and Refinement: All generated sections are compiled, and a concluding LLM call refines the complete document to ensure stylistic uniformity, remove generation artifacts, and verify internal consistency. This hierarchical approach ensures that generated documents exhibit the coherence characteristics of real-world documents, avoiding the inconsistencies that often arise from single-shot generation. 

A.2 Baseline Prompts 

Below we provide the exact prompts used for each prompting baseline. In all prompts, 

<QUESTION> , <OPTIONS> , <PARAMS> , <G_MATRIX> ,

<DOCUMENTS> , and <USER_PREFS> are placeholders populated from the scenario data. 

A.2.1 B1: LLM-Direct 

You are a decision-making assistant. === DECISION QUESTION === <QUESTION> === OPTIONS === <OPTIONS> === USER PREFERENCES === <USER_PREFS> === PARAMETERS === <PARAMS> === G-MATRIX (How each option scores on each parameter, 0-1 scale) === <G_MATRIX> === DOCUMENTS === <DOCUMENTS> === TASK === Based on the user 's preferences and the information above, select the best option for this user. OUTPUT FORMAT (JSON only): {"ranking": ["best_option", "second_best", ...], "decision": "best_option" }

A.2.2 B2: LLM-CoT 

Identical to B1, with the following task section replaced: 

=== TASK === Based on the user 's preferences and the information provided, determine which option is best for this user. Let 's think step by step: - First, identify which parameters matter most to this user based on their preference weights. - Then, analyze how each option scores on those key parameters. - Finally, weigh the trade-offs and make your decision. Respond with JSON in this format: {"reasoning": "Your step-by-step analysis...", "ranking": ["best_option", "second_best", ...], "decision": "best_option" }

A.2.3 B3: LLM-Structured Dialogue 

The LLM receives the decision context (question, options, parameters, G-matrix, abbreviated docu-ments) but not the user’s preference vector. It is instructed to ask up to 10 yes/no questions: 

You are a helpful decision assistant having a conversation with a user. === CONTEXT === Decision Question: <QUESTION> Options: <OPTIONS> Parameters that matter: <PARAMS> G-Matrix: <G_MATRIX> Documents (abbreviated): <DOCUMENTS> === YOUR TASK === You need to help the user choose the best option. To do this: 1. Ask the user YES/NO questions to understand their preferences 2. After gathering enough information (3-5 questions), make a recommendation === RULES === - Ask ONE question at a time - Questions must be answerable with YES or NO - Focus on understanding which parameters matter most to the user - When ready to recommend, provide your decision === OUTPUT FORMAT === For each turn, output JSON: {"type": "question" or "decision", "content": "Your question" (if asking), "ranking": ["best", "2nd best", ...] (if deciding), "reasoning": "Brief reasoning" }

A.2.4 B4: LLM-Free Dialogue 

Similar to B3, but the LLM has full autonomy over question format, count, and stopping: 

You are a decision assistant helping a user make a choice. === DECISION CONTEXT === Question: <QUESTION> Options: <OPTIONS> Relevant Factors: <PARAMS> How options score on these factors: <G_MATRIX> Documents (abbreviated): <DOCUMENTS> === YOUR TASK === Help the user make the best decision for THEIR specific needs. You have FULL AUTONOMY over your strategy: - You may ask the user questions to understand their preferences - You may ask ANY type of question (open-ended, comparison, yes/no, etc.) - You decide how many questions to ask (could be 0 if you think you have enough info) - You decide when you 're ready to make a recommendation The user knows their own preferences but hasn 'tstudied the options in detail. Your job is to match their preferences to the best option. === OUTPUT FORMAT === Respond with JSON: {"action": "ask" or "decide", "content": "Your question" (if asking), "ranking": ["best", "2nd best", ...] (if deciding), "reasoning": "Why you 're asking / why this recommendation" }

A.3 Candidate Set Size Ablation 

We ablate the effect of candidate set size by reduc-ing M from 10 to 5, comparing D ECISIVE against the two strongest baselines (B1 and B2) on a repre-sentative subset (Table 4).                                                             

> Domain Method Top-1 Top-2 NDCG@3 MRR Avg Qs
> Education DECISIVE 81.0 93.8 0.930 0.881 3.7 Education B1 75.0 91.0 0.908 0.856 –Education B2 78.2 89.0 0.909 0.881 –Finance DECISIVE 79.0 95.0 0.922 0.878 3.4 Finance B1 76.0 91.0 0.911 0.872 –Finance B2 77.4 92.3 0.896 0.873 –Hiring DECISIVE 93.4 98.0 0.974 0.964 1.2 Hiring B1 91.0 97.4 0.967 0.955 –Hiring B2 92.0 97.6 0.970 0.958 –

Table 4: Effect of candidate set size ( M =5). D ECISIVE 

outperforms both fully-informed baselines across all domains, with fewer interaction questions required com-pared to M =10. 

DECISIVE outperforms both baselines even at 

M =5 while requiring fewer questions. This is ex-pected because our preference elicitation operates over decision factors rather than individual options, allowing the framework to scale naturally with M .In contrast, prompting-based baselines must fit the entire option set and associated documents into the context window, which becomes increasingly limit-ing as M grows. Notably, the gains over prompting baselines are more pronounced at larger M (Ta-ble 1), where simple prompting-based approaches struggle to jointly reason over all candidates.