Title: Efficient Incremental #SAT via Cross-Instance Knowledge Reuse

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.00671v1

Published Time: Mon, 04 May 2026 00:53:05 GMT

Number of Pages: 13

Markdown Content:
# Efficient Incremental #SAT via Cross-Instance Knowledge Reuse 

# Uriya Bartal 1 , Dror Fried 1 , Jean-Marie Lagniez 21The Open University Of Israel, Raanana, Israel 

> 2

# CRIL, U. Artois & CNRS, F-62300 Lens, France bauriya2@post.openu.ac.il, dfried@openu.ac.il, lagniez@cril.fr 

Abstract 

Model counting ( #SAT) is a fundamental yet #P-complete problem central to probabilistic reasoning. In this work, we address incremental model counting , where sequences of structurally similar formulas must be counted. We propose an approach that amortizes computation via a persistent caching mechanism, retaining component data across solver calls to avoid redundant search. Additionally, we investigate branch-ing heuristics adapted for this setting. We focus on the prob-lems of argumentation and soft core, for which incremental model counting is natural. Experiments demonstrate that our method improves performance compared to current model counters, highlighting the capability of structure-aware reuse in dynamic environments. 

# 1 Introduction 

Model counting (also known as #SAT) is a fundamental problem in constraint programming and automated reason-ing, with key applications in artificial intelligence (Pala-cios et al. 2005; Domshlak and Hoffmann 2006; Izza et al. 2023), product configuration (Astesana, Cosserat, and Fargier 2010; Sundermann et al. 2024), and other domains. The goal is to compute or estimate the number of solu-tions that satisfy a given set of Boolean constraints. Model counting is an inherently challenging task (Valiant 1979), and thus presents significant scalability challenges (Fichte, Hecher, and Hamiti 2021). Nevertheless, the central role of model counting has motivated substantial research into the development of both exact and approximate model count-ing algorithms capable of handling increasingly large and complex instances. This ongoing progress is exemplified by recent model counting competitions (Fichte and Hecher 2025) that demonstrate the advancement of tools and pro-vide rigorous benchmarks for state-of-the-art solvers. Awide range of (exact) model counters have been intro-duced and investigated, including search-based approaches such as cachet (Sang et al. 2004), SharpSAT (Thurley 2006), SharpSAT-TD (Korhonen and J¨ arvisalo 2021), and 

ganak (Soos and Meel 2025), as well as compilation-based approaches like C2D (Darwiche 2004), SDD (Oztok and Darwiche 2015), dSharp (Muise et al. 2012), eadt (Ko-riche et al. 2013), and d4 (Lagniez and Marquis 2017). Despite this significant progress, current model counters typically treat each problem instance in isolation, necessi-tating recomputation from scratch even when the constraints are syntactically similar and only minor modifications are made to the constraint set. This approach can be highly in-efficient in iterative design or optimization processes where models are refined incrementally. For example, an infras-tructure planner optimizing a road network may adjust only a handful of roads at a time, but must still recompute the model count for the entire network after each change. In this work, we present a model counting framework specifically engineered to exploit sequences of syntactically related problem instances. Specifically, we target a dynamic environment where the propositional theory evolves via ar-bitrary updates, including the addition or removal of clauses and modifications to the variable set. In this online set-ting, instances are processed incrementally, without the need for a lookahead, leveraging structural similarity to optimize performance. Crucially, our framework requires weaker as-sumptions than Incremental SAT (Nadel and Ryvchin 2012), accommodating broader structural modifications. We elab-orate on these distinctions and the implications for solver efficiency in Section 2. The core contribution of our work is a novel method for dynamically sharing computation knowledge across bench-marks. We focus on two forms of sharing: cache sharing 

and branching heuristic sharing . Achieving shared caching in this setting is non-trivial, which likely explains why, de-spite its clear potential, such an approach has not been re-alized previously. Classical caching techniques for model counting typically assume a static benchmark, where the underlying problem instance remains fixed. This assump-tion breaks down in our dynamic scenario, where formu-las evolve across invocations. In particular, we show that effective cache reuse across different calls requires repre-senting the entire formula in memory. Although this risks high memory consumption, our experiments show that cache reuse can yield orders-of-magnitude performance improve-ments over isolated strategies. Further, we introduce a 

cache management strategy utilizing quasi-canonical forms for symmetry detection. This significantly improves effi-ciency by identifying syntactically equivalent subproblems, as we demonstrate on selected benchmarks. Additionally, we explore the reuse of branching heuristics, which affects the choice of which variable to branch on, during the model counting process. We show that sharing the same tree de-

> arXiv:2605.00671v1 [cs.LO] 1 May 2026

composition, that encapsulates variable ordering constraints, is especially effective on hard cases, in which subsequent formulas are obtained mostly by clause removal. Our framework is implemented on top of d4 , a state-of-the-art model counter, featuring advanced cache manage-ment techniques suitable for our purposes. We focus our evaluation on the problems of dynamic argumentation (Rot-stein et al. 2010) and soft cores computation (Audemard et al. 2022) where syntactically similar formulas naturally arise and efficient handling is essential. We evaluate our tool on a suite of synthetic and real-world benchmarks, originating from (J¨ arvisalo, Lehtonen, and Niskanen 2023; Fichte, Hecher, and Hamiti 2021; Lagniez and Lonca 2024). Our results show that our tool achieves performance im-provements over current leading tools, highlighting its ef-fectiveness on syntactically similar benchmarks. Section 2 discusses related work, followed by preliminar-ies in Section 3. Section 4 formalizes the incremental frame-work. We present persistent caching in Section 5 and heuris-tic reuse in Section 6. Experiments are detailed in Section 7, followed by conclusions in Section 8. 

# 2 Related Work 

We first distinguish our work from Incremental SAT. In the SAT domain, incrementality typically refers to scenarios where the formula remains static but some literals are fixed as assumptions. In practice, allowing certain literals to be set as assumptions often suffices for applications that require the addition or removal of clauses (Nadel 2010). This is achieved by adding an auxiliary literal to each clause, which is set to false to activate the clause and true to deactivate it. Through this mechanism, SAT solvers can retain learnt clauses and internal data structures across different queries, as the base formula itself does not change: only the set of assumed literals does. Consequently, clause-learning and variable activity information can be preserved and reused, thereby improving performance on closely related instances, as is standard in incremental SAT solving. A similar principle applies to model counting: recent work (Lagniez and Marquis 2019) has shown that maintain-ing a persistent cache across multiple counting queries can offer significant performance benefits. This allows retain-ing learned clauses, caches, and variable weights, mirroring incremental SAT strategies to enable efficient information reuse across subproblems. However, this form of incremen-tality is fundamentally limited. It is only practical when the set of all possible formulas is known in advance and when auxiliary variables can be introduced to activate or deac-tivate parts of the formula. If future modifications to the formula cannot be predicted, it becomes infeasible to pre-serve and reuse information between different model count-ing calls. A recent model counter for Pseudo-Boolean (PB) formu-las that, like our work, targets the incremental setting is 

PBCount2 (Yang and Meel 2025). There are, however, fundamental architectural distinctions between the two ap-proaches. Most notably, it relies on compiling constraints into Algebraic Decision Diagrams (ADDs). Its incremen-tal mechanism caches these individual constraint ADDs, which must be retrieved via a linear scan and re-merged to reflect updates in the formula. In contrast, our frame-work operates directly on the CNF structure using compo-nent caching. Rather than storing constraint fragments, we cache subformulas (components) alongside their computed model counts. This allows for immediate retrieval via hash-based lookups during search, bypassing the need for costly diagram reconstruction or merge operations. Furthermore, while PBCount2 performs a polynomial-time retrieval step once per formula update, our approach employs a constant-time hashing check at every node in the search tree, offer-ing a different trade-off geared towards deep search per-formance. Consistent with our methodology, PBCount2 

also disables preprocessing in incremental mode to preserve cache validity. We nevertheless include it in our discussion as it represents the primary existing framework for exact incremental counting, although its focus on PB constraints and ADDs differs from our CDCL-based CNF approach. A major difference in the experimental settings between our work and PBCount2 is that they have a 3-step or 5-step in-cremental model counting presented in their evaluation sec-tion. Namely, each benchmark undergoes 3 or 5 incremental changes. On the contrary, our argumentation setting deals with 1000 steps, while our soft core setting has m steps, m

being the number of clauses in the input formula. Therefore, in our setting, although for the first 5 steps, PBCount2 may outperform our tool, we handle the remaining many more steps, in which PBCount2 struggles. Another related work worth mentioning in regards to our work is Cara (Illner 2025) which uses similar symmetry techniques in caching but for the purpose of knowledge com-pilation, rather than model counting. We further discuss the differences in the full version of our paper. Despite the sophistication of modern counters, the ma-jority remain strictly static, discarding all learned state be-tween invocations. Aside from PBCount2 , no existing tool supports the reuse of learned subproblems across sequences of syntactically similar CNF formulas. This gap motivates our contribution: a dedicated incremental CNF counter that enables effective cross-instance cache sharing without the overhead of full knowledge compilation. 

# 3 Background 

Let L be a propositional language constructed from a finite set of propositional variables P and the standard logical con-nectives. A literal ℓ is either a propositional variable (e.g., 

x) or its negation ( ¬x). Given a literal ℓ over a variable x,the complementary literal ℓ is defined as ℓ = ¬x if ℓ = x,and ℓ = x if ℓ = ¬x. We denote the variable associated with a literal ℓ by Var (ℓ) = x. A term is a conjunction of literals, and a clause is a disjunction of literals. Terms and clauses may, when convenient, be regarded as sets of liter-als. A CNF formula Φ is a conjunction of clauses and may also be treated as a set of clauses when appropriate. Var (Φ) 

denotes the set of variables in Φ.

Example 1. Consider the CNF formula Φ over variables Var (Φ) = {x1, . . . , x 5} with clauses: {x1 ∨ x2 ∨ x3, ¬x1 ∨¬x2 ∨¬ x3, x 4 ∨¬ x1, x 5 ∨x1, x 5 ∨x2 ∨x3, x 4 ∨¬ x2 ∨¬ x3}.

An interpretation (or world ) over P, denoted by ω, is a mapping from P to {0, 1}. Interpretations are often repre-sented as sets of literals, one per variable in P, consisting of exactly those literals assigned the value 1 by ω. The set of all possible interpretations is denoted by W. An interpreta-tion ω is said to be a model of a formula Φ ∈ L if it satisfies the formula under the standard truth-functional semantics. The SAT problem asks whether such a model exists. The set of all models of a formula Φ is denoted by mod (Φ) and is defined as mod (Φ) = {ω ∈ W | ω |= Φ }. The symbol 

|= denotes logical entailment, and ≡ denotes logical equiv-alence. For any formulas Φ, Ψ ∈ L , we have: Φ |= Ψ if and only if mod (Φ) ⊆ mod (Ψ) and Φ ≡ Ψ if and only if mod (Φ) = mod (Ψ) . The notation ∥Φ∥ denotes the number of models of Φ over the variables in Var (Φ) . For exam-ple, the number of models of Φ, as defined in Example 1, is 

∥Φ∥ = 10 . The problem of model counting determines the number of models of a Boolean formula Φ.Since model counting is closely related to the SAT prob-lem, many of the most effective strategies are built upon DPLL-based SAT solvers (Gomes, Sabharwal, and Selman 2021). These solvers are extended beyond satisfiability checking to compute the exact number of satisfying assign-ments. In particular, DPLL-based model counters recur-sively explore the search space by branching on variables and simplifying the formula at each decision point. Un-like SAT solvers that halt upon finding one solution, model counters must exhaustively enumerate all models, making the task significantly more challenging. A standard optimization in DPLL-based counting is con-nected component decomposition. When the formula splits into variable-disjoint subformulas, their counts are com-puted separately and multiplied, drastically pruning the search space (Sang et al. 2004). Another crucial optimiza-tion is component caching: because identical subproblems can arise in different branches of the search tree, model counters store the counts of previously solved components in a cache (Sang et al. 2004; Thurley 2006; Lagniez and Marquis 2021). If the same component is encountered again, the solver can retrieve the cached result instead of recomputing it. Component decomposition and caching un-derpin state-of-the-art exact counters, enabling scalability on structured instances (Sang et al. 2004; Thurley 2006; Korhonen and J¨ arvisalo 2021; Sharma et al. 2019; Lagniez and Marquis 2017). In the heart of these optimizations, branching variable selection remains critical for performance. By exploiting structural properties, such as those derived from tree decom-positions, heuristics can be guided to significantly reduce the effective search space (Korhonen and J¨ arvisalo 2021). Nevertheless, all the mechanisms employed by a model counter (such as component decomposition, caching, and branching heuristics) are intrinsically tied to the specific in-stance being solved. As a result, these structures and strate-gies cannot typically be reused directly when addressing a new problem instance. This paper challenges this situation. As we demonstrate in the following sections, it is possible, under certain conditions, to fully reuse the cache structure regardless of the subsequent formula. 

# 4 The Incremental Model Counting Framework 

In this work, we formalize the problem of incremental model counting as a dynamic process operating on an evolving propositional theory. Unlike the static setting, our framework maintains a cur-rent state that is modified by sequences of updates. Crucially, model counting is not performed after every atomic modification, but rather at specific checkpoints after a batch of operations has been applied. The framework we describe in the following subsection is a general framework that is intended to be flexible to cap-ture the fact that the definition of “incremental” is some-how from the user’s perspective. In some benchmarks (e.g. soft core), “incremental” can mean changing a single clause, while in others (e.g. argumentation), ”incremental” means much wider changes. We do not want to limit our frame-work to allow for this flexibility. 

4.1 State and Operations 

Let U be the universe of all propositional variables. We de-fine the state of the system at time step t as a pair Φt =

⟨V t, Ct⟩, where Vt ⊆ U is the current set of active variables and Ct is a set of clauses over Vt. The model count of the state Φt is defined as the number of satisfying assignments of the CNF formula formed by Ct over the variables Vt.The transition between states, denoted Φt+1 =

update (Φ t, δ ), is driven by an update operation δ. We con-sider the following four atomic rules for the update opera-tion: • Clause Addition (add clause (c)): Adds a new clause c to the theory: Vt+1 = Vt, Ct+1 = Ct ∪ { c}. Precondition: 

vars (c) ⊆ V t.• Clause Removal (rem clause (c)): Removes an existing clause from the theory: Vt+1 = Vt, Ct+1 = Ct \ { c}.• Variable Addition (add var (v)): Introduces a new variable 

v into the scope: Vt+1 = Vt ∪ { v}, Ct+1 = Ct. Note: 

Adding a variable without adding constraints essentially doubles the model count. • Variable Removal (rem var (v)): Removes a variable v

from the scope: Vt+1 = Vt \ { v}, Ct+1 = Ct. Pre-condition: The variable v must not appear in any clause in Ct. Formally, ∀c ∈ C t, v / ∈ vars (c). This ensures that we do not leave “dangling” literals in the clause database. 

Problem Definition We define an update batch , denoted as ∆, as a finite sequence of atomic operations. The Incremental Model Counting problem is defined as follows: Given an initial state Φ0 = ⟨V init , Cinit ⟩ and a se-quence of update batches ∆ = ⟨∆1, ∆2, . . . , ∆k⟩, compute the sequence of counts: 

⟨∥ Φ1∥ , ∥Φ2∥ , . . . , ∥Φk∥⟩ where Φi is the state resulting from applying the sequence of operations in ∆i to Φi−1.The objective is to minimize the total computational time of the entire sequence of counts. We achieve this by leverag-ing information learned during the computation of Φ0...i −1

to accelerate the counting of Φi.

# 5 Shared Caching in Model Counting 

As detailed in the preliminaries, model counters employ search procedures that recursively decompose the input for-mula Σ into subformulas. To optimize this process, com-puted counts are stored in a cache: if a subformula Σ′ is encountered again during the search, its model count is re-trieved directly from the cache, thereby eliminating the need for redundant re-computation. Our strategy persists the cache across benchmarks to en-able subformula count reuse. While conceptually simple, this presents significant implementation challenges. Sec-tion 5.1 analyzes the limitations of standard caching mech-anisms in this context, while Section 5.2 introduces a novel optimization to adapt the basic scheme for efficient reuse. 

5.1 Cache in Model Counters 

During the search, the solver encounters subformulas φ

derived from Σ via conditioning. We define a caching scheme c as a mapping from each φ to a representation 

rc(φ), with the cache storing the map rc(φ) 7 → ∥ φ∥. Acache miss occurs if no matching representation is found. A scheme is correct if collision implies logical equivalence: 

rc(φ1) = rc(φ2) = ⇒ φ1 ≡ φ2.The performance of a caching scheme is determined by a trade-off between memory footprint and the granularity of equivalence detection. We review three standard approaches and analyze their applicability to our dynamic setting. In the basic scheme used by cachet , each subformula φ is repre-sented explicitly as a string of literals, with clauses separated by zeroes. While robust, this representation is memory-intensive. To improve efficiency, SharpSAT employs a hy-brid scheme. It assigns static indices to the clauses of the input formula Σ. A subformula is represented by a pair: the set of variables present and the sorted list of indices of the 

original clauses that belong to the subformula. Crucially, to save space, SharpSAT omits indices of binary clauses from this representation, relying on the static implication graph to handle them implicitly. d4 adopts a structured explicit ap-proach. It stores the clauses of φ directly but applies aggres-sive normalization: literals within clauses and the clauses themselves are sorted lexicographically to maximize cache hits. To optimize memory, d4 does not store clauses that were originally binary in Σ, nor clauses that have not been shortened by the current assignment. The optimized schemes of SharpSAT and d4 fundamen-tally rely on the assumption that the input formula Σ is static. They achieve compression by treating binary clauses (or un-shortened clauses) as implicit background knowledge that does not need to be part of the cache key. In our incremental setting, however, where the formula evolves, this assumption leads to unsoundness. Consider two different formulas: Σ1 = {x1 ∨ x2} and Σ2 = {x1 ∨

x2, ¬x1 ∨ ¬ x2}. Under the schemes of SharpSAT or d4 ,the cache representation of both Σ1 and Σ2 would be identi-cal: a variable set {x1, x 2} with an empty clause list (since the clauses are binary and thus omitted). However, Σ1 has 3 models while Σ2 has 2. A cache entry created for Σ1 would be incorrectly retrieved for Σ2, yielding a wrong count. Consequently, we cannot use these compressed represen-tations. We must adopt a fully explicit caching scheme simi-lar to cachet , which captures the exact semantic content of the subformula regardless of the global context. In the fol-lowing section, we introduce optimizations to mitigate the memory overhead of this approach. 

5.2 The Lazy Symmetry Caching 

As discussed in the previous section, we decided to em-ploy an explicit caching scheme to ensure correctness. To maximize efficiency, we adopt d4 ’s normalization: literals and clauses are lexicographically sorted, and duplicates re-moved. Crucially, our method goes beyond exact variable matching, detecting equivalent subproblems even when de-fined on disjoint variable sets. In the following, we intro-duce symmetry caching and detail our novel lazy symmetry caching mechanism, which exploits our explicit representa-tion to identify these symmetries. Symmetries are typically exploited via permutations: a permutation σ over LP , the set of all literals over P, is a bijective mapping from LP = P ∪ {¬ x | x ∈ P} to it-self. Any such permutation σ can be naturally extended to a homomorphism on propositional formulas, such that for every Boolean connective c of arity k: σ(c(α1, . . . , α k)) = 

c(σ(α1), . . . , σ (αk)) .Throughout this paper, we assume that any permutation 

σ under consideration satisfies the following stability condi-tion : for any pair of literals ℓ1, ℓ 2, it holds that σ(ℓ1) = ℓ2 if and only if σ(ℓ1) = ℓ2.Each permutation σ is represented in simplified cycle no-tation : as a product of cycles corresponding to its non-trivial orbits (i.e., those of length at least two). In this notation, for each orbit {ℓ1, . . . , ℓ k}, only one of the two cycles (ℓ1 . . . ℓ k) or (ℓ1 . . . ℓ k) is shown. For example, if LP = {x1, . . . , x 6}, the permutation represented by 

(x1 ¬x3 x4)( x5 x6) corresponds to mapping x1 to ¬x3, ¬x1

to x3, x3 to ¬x4, ¬x3 to x4, x4 to x1, ¬x4 to ¬x1, x5 to x6,

¬x5 to ¬x6, x6 to x5, and ¬x6 to ¬x5, with x2 and ¬x2

remaining fixed. The identity permutation is represented by the empty product in this notation. 

Example 2 (Example 1 cont’d) . Consider the formula Φ

from Example 1. Suppose we evaluate the assignment 

{x3}, resulting in the residual formula φx3 = {¬ x1 ∨¬x2, x 4 ∨ ¬ x1, x 5 ∨ x1, x 4 ∨ ¬ x2}. Now, consider in-stead the assignment {¬ x3}, for which the residual formula is φ¬x3 = {x1 ∨ x2, x 4 ∨ ¬ x1, x 5 ∨ x1, x 5 ∨ x2}. Let 

σ = ( x1 ¬x1)( x2 ¬x2)( x4 x5) be the permutation that swaps x1 with ¬x1, x2 with ¬x2, and x4 with x5. Note that applying σ to Φ yields σ(φx3 ) = φ¬x3 .

As shown in (Bart et al. 2014), in the context of knowl-edge compilation, symmetry caching is a powerful tech-nique that can significantly reduce the size of the represen-tation. The authors propose a greedy method that searches the cache for an entry φs equivalent to the current formula 

φ up to variable renaming, filtering candidates by size and literal counts. However, this approach is computationally expensive due to the cost of verifying renamings, and relies on generic hash properties that increase collision rates. To overcome the limitations of symmetry caching over shared caching, we propose a lazy approach in which each formula inserted into the cache is stored by using a canonical representation. Rather than the standard lexicographic or-dering, we employ a representation that incorporates struc-tural information about the formula. We describe our method in steps. First, for each literal, we count the number of clauses in which it appears, and for each pair of literals, we sort them by their frequency of occurrence (increasing order). In the case of a tie, the negative literal is listed first. 

Example 3 (Example 2 cont’d) . Consider the two formu-las computed in Example 2. For φx3 , the literal pairs (for each variable) are: (x1, ¬x1), (x2, ¬x2), (¬x4, x 4),and (¬x5, x 5). For φ¬x3 , the corresponding pairs are: 

(¬x1, x 1), (¬x2, x 2), (¬x4, x 4), and (¬x5, x 5).

We then sort these pairs (each associated with a vari-able) lexicographically according to the frequency of occur-rence of each literal in the formula, with ties broken by lex-icographical order. For example note that the encoding of 

(¬x4, x 4) in φx3 is (0 , 2) .

Example 4 (Example 3 cont’d) . For φx3 , after sorting, we obtain the ordering: (¬x5, x 5), (x2, ¬x2), (¬x4, x 4),

(x1, ¬x1). For φ¬x3 , the sorted order is: (¬x4, x 4),

(¬x2, x 2), (¬x5, x 5), (¬x1, x 1).

Finally, for each pair, we select the first literal and use its position in the sorted ordering to construct the associated permutation σ. Specifically, for each variable, we consider the negative literal when associating positions in the permu-tation. In this way we normalize the formulas to have the same canonical ordering. For example in φ¬x3 , (¬x4, x 4)

is the first pair in the order so the permutation σ¬x3 takes 

¬x4 to ¬x1, which is the first (negated) literal. Similarly the permutation σx3 takes ¬x5 to ¬x1.

Example 5 (Example 4 cont’d) . Continuing with the for-mulas from Example 4: For φx3 , we obtain σx3 =(¬x4 ¬x1)( ¬x2 ¬x2)( ¬x5 ¬x3)( ¬x1 ¬x4). For φ¬x3 , we obtain σ¬x3 = ( ¬x5 ¬x1)( x2 ¬x2)( ¬x4 ¬x3)( x1 ¬x4).

Once the permutation associated with a formula is deter-mined, we store the formula obtained by applying the per-mutation in the cache, rather than the original formula. Since applying a permutation to a formula preserves the number of satisfying assignments, we all in all get that the permuted formula is associated with the model count of the original, non-permuted formula. 

Example 6 (Example 5 cont’d) . Consider the two formulas from Example 2 along with their permutations computed in Example 5. We have σ¬x3 (φx3 ) = {x4 ∨x2, x 1 ∨¬ x4, x 3 ∨

x4, x 3 ∨ x2} = σx3 (φ¬x3 ).

As this example illustrates, lazy symmetry caching al-lows us to identify and reuse formulas with identical model counts, even if they are not syntactically equivalent. In this approach, the hash function operates on the permuted (canonicalized) version of the formula. Since we already store the full formula in the cache, this strategy incurs no additional storage cost, aside from the modest computational overhead of determining the appropriate permutation. It is important to note that this caching strategy is only directly applicable to model counting, where permutations do not affect the count. In the context of weighted model counting, additional care must be taken to ensure that the weights are also preserved under the applied permutation. 

# 6 Shared Heuristics 

The decision of which variable to branch on next is a critical factor that significantly affects the practical perfor-mance of model counters. Numerous classical SAT branch-ing heuristics have been proposed in the literature, such as MOM (Dubois et al. 1993), JWTS (Jeroslow and Wang 1990), and VSIDS (Moskewicz et al. 2001), along with heuristics specifically designed for model counting, includ-ing DLCS and VSADS (Sang, Beame, and Kautz 2005). However, the most effective heuristics often exploit struc-tural properties of the given formula. In particular, the struc-ture of a formula, captured by its primal graph, offers valu-able information that can be leveraged to design more effi-cient decision heuristics. By utilizing tree decompositions (TDs) of the primal graph, a solver can exploit this inherent structure, thereby potentially reducing the effective search space and substantially improving the efficiency of model counting. A primal graph of a CNF formula Φ is an undirected graph whose vertices are the variables of Φ, with edges be-tween variables that appear together in at least one clause. A 

tree decomposition (Robertson and Seymour 1986; Bodlaen-der 2005) of a graph G is a tree T whose nodes, called bags ,are subsets of vertices of G, and which collectively cover the vertices and edges of G while guaranteeing a certain connec-tivity property (see, e.g., (Robertson and Seymour 1986)). The width of a decomposition is the size of its largest bag minus one; the treewidth of G is the minimum such width. Tree decomposition is fundamental in model counting, enabling dynamic programming algorithms with time com-plexity O(2 k · n), where k is the treewidth. This makes the problem fixed-parameter tractable w.r.t. k, offering ef-ficiency for low-treewidth formulas. However, since prac-tical instances often have large treewidths, state-of-the-art counters use this structural information more flexibly. For instance, Korhonen and J¨ arvisalo (Korhonen and J¨ arvisalo 2021) show that hybrid scores (combining tree decomposi-tion data with traditional heuristics) improve performance even when theoretical bounds are not strictly met. This hybrid approach enables modern model counters to exploit the advantages of structural decomposition even for instances of high treewidth, by strategically prioritizing vari-ables according to their structural relevance. In our setting, we consider the model counting problem over a repository of multiple, closely related Boolean formulas. Since comput-ing a tree decomposition can be computationally expensive, performing this preprocessing step separately for each for-mula in the repository is generally impractical. Instead, we propose computing the tree decomposition only once, dur-ing the initial iteration, and reusing it for all subsequent for-mulas in the repository. This approach amortizes the over-head of tree decomposition construction, reducing it from 

N computations (one per formula) to a single computation per repository, and thus yields significant efficiency gains by eliminating redundant work and enabling more consis-tent variable ordering across related instances. The key insight is that when a formula is modified solely by clause removal, its existing tree decomposition remains a valid structural representation, even if it is no longer optimal. Moreover, as tree decompositions encode variable ordering constraints, integrating this structural information into the branching heuristic guides the solver to explore similar sub-formulas when analyzing related formulas. Empirical re-sults, presented in the next section, confirm that this strategy can yield significant performance improvements. For similar reasons, we opt for the DLCS heuristic rather than VSADS, the latter being generally more effective when solving a single, standalone benchmark. The DLCS heuris-tic assigns each variable a weight equal to the number of clauses in which it appears and selects the variable with the highest score for branching. In contrast, VSADS multiplies the DLCS score of a variable v by the number of times v par-ticipates in conflicts encountered during the search, thus in-corporating conflict-driven information. Our intuition is that DLCS, being less influenced by conflict-driven clause learn-ing, yields more stable and predictable branching decisions across syntactically similar formulas, thereby increasing the likelihood of positive cache hits. Experimental results sup-port this hypothesis, showing that DLCS consistently out-performs VSADS in our setting. 

# 7 Implementation and Evaluation 

In this section, we present two evaluation settings. The first examines the benefits of sharing when counting the number of complete extensions in a dynamic argumentation frame-work (Dung 1993). The second setting addresses the compu-tation of subset-minimal soft cores (Audemard et al. 2022). We describe each setting separately, explain how it fits into our incremental model counting framework, and show by evaluation how the re-use of knowledge across the various instances succeeds over methods in which each instance is a standalone. 

7.1 Settings and Research Questions 

All the experiments for both settings were carried out on a cluster equipped with dual 32-core Intel ® Xeon ® Gold 6130 CPUs (2.10GHz) and 32 GiB of memory, running Rocky Linux 8.7 (kernel version 4.18.0-425.13.1.el8 7.x86 64) and using the gcc 11.4.0 compiler. All code was implemented in C++. We enforce a timeout limit of 60 minutes per bench-mark. For our experiments, we developed a tool named d4 -dyn ,based on the state-of-the-art model counter d4 1. d4 -dyn 

> 1https://github.com/crillab/d4v2

implements the incremental framework formalized in Sec-tion 4, evolving the formula through step-by-step modifica-tions while maintaining a persistent state, rather than solv-ing a sequence of independent instances. Our tool supports three caching modes: No-Sharing ( NoShared ), where each instance is solved independently with a local cache; Shared-cache ( Shared ), where the cache persists across updates; and Shared cache + Symmetry ( Shared+Sym ), which ex-tends the shared mode by activating d4 -dyn ’s symmetry detection during cache operations. See Section 5 for de-tails. Additionally, d4 -dyn features an orthogonal Tree Decomposition Sharing (TD) mode, as explained in Section 6, which reuses the tree decomposition com-puted for the initial formula for all subsequent instances. Finally, the tool supports two branching heuristics, VSADS 

and DLCS , as detailed in Section 6. For each setting our objective is to evaluate the following. First (RQ1), how does the deterministic DLCS branching heuristic perform compared to the VSADS branching heuris-tic, across all of our tool modes. Second (RQ2), which mode of d4 -dyn with the best branching heuristic, is the most ef-ficient. Finding that either of the shared modes is the most efficient, demonstrates the advantage of knowledge re-use for our problem settings. Finally (RQ3), we are also inter-ested to learn how this best mode is compared against other state-of-the-art model counters. For that, We benchmark against two external solvers: ganak (Soos and Meel 2025), the winner of the 2025 Model Counting Competition, 2 and PBcount2 (Yang, Lai, and Meel 2025), which similarly to us, employs knowledge reuse across instances. These tools were executed using their default (or near-default) settings, following common practice. 

7.2 Argumentation 

Problem Definition To thoroughly evaluate our approach, we adopt as a test bed the problem of counting extensions within an Argumentation Framework (AF), focusing partic-ularly on the complete semantic of dynamic argumentation, wherein the AF may evolve over time. 

Abstract argumentation , introduced by Dung (Dung 1993), provides a foundational paradigm for formalizing ar-gumentative reasoning in artificial intelligence. An argu-mentation framework consists of a set of abstract arguments together with binary attack relations among them. The prin-cipal computational task is to identify subsets of arguments, called extensions , which are deemed collectively acceptable according to different semantics . Formally, a set of argu-ments S constitutes a complete extension if: (i) S is conflict-free (no arguments in S attack each other); (ii) every argu-ment in S is defended by S against attacks from outside; and (iii) S contains all arguments that it defends. Beyond clas-sical acceptance tasks, the counting problem in abstract ar-gumentation involves quantifying the number of extensions under a given semantics (Lagniez et al. 2021), offering in-sight into the diversity and nature of solutions. This is par-ticularly valuable in scenarios such as preference-based de-cision making and probabilistic reasoning. 

> 2https://mccompetition.org/

Dynamic argumentation examines how argument status shifts under modification, a critical concern in evolving multi-agent systems (Bistarelli et al. 2024). To systemati-cally evaluate performance, we employ crustabri (cril-lab 2025) to generate dynamic Argumentation Frameworks (AFs) by iteratively applying random perturbations: • Delete argument (10%): Remove an argument and its at-tacks. • Add argument with attacks (20%): Add a new argument that attacks others. • Delete attacks (40%): Remove random attack relations. • Add attacks (30%): Add new attack relations between ex-isting arguments. Each resulting AF is translated into a CNF formula Γ us-ing the standard encoding from (Besnard and Doutre 2004) and implemented in crustabri . We adapt our incremen-tal framework terminology from Section 4. However, given the potentially extensive structural differences between con-secutive AFs, we implement the transition from Φi−1 to Φi

as a full reset: the update batch clears the current state and inserts all clauses of Γ. Consequently, each initial AF bench-mark yields a sequence ⟨Φ1, . . . , Φ1000 ⟩ of CNF instances derived from the evolving framework. For a dataset, we use 264 AFs from the 2023 Abstract Ar-gumentation Competition(J¨ arvisalo, Lehtonen, and Niska-nen 2023). The AFs are described in Appendix A.1. We have used the Cleaning Expectation method of d4 

to prevent memory-outs. 

Evaluation Details Answering RQ1 To evaluate the impact of the branch-ing heuristic on the effectiveness of our approach, we per-formed a comparison between DLCS and VSADS on all benchmarks and modes. d4 -dyn with DLCS reaches a peak of 203 solved benchmarks, outperforming VSADS , which tops out at 172. Specifically, DLCS solves 187, 188, and 203 benchmarks across the No Shared , Shared , and 

Shared+Sym configurations, respectively, while VSADS 

solves 166, 172, and 171 in the same settings. When analyzing the results, we observed that, on aver-age, DLCS is approximately 15% faster than VSADS in our experimental setup. This outcome is consistent with our in-tuition: the deterministic nature of DLCS increases the like-lihood of positive cache hits. Since caching relies on re-encountering similar substructures during the search, a de-terministic traversal strategy such as DLCS promotes more consistent exploration patterns, thereby enhancing cache reuse and improving overall efficiency of d4 -dyn . As such, we decided to continue with the DLCS heuristic for our re-maining comparisons. 

Answering RQ2 We ran d4 -dyn with all three modes. Since the modifications between formulas are random, we observed that shared Tree Decomposition (TD), does not seem to scale, and indeed after preliminary tests we decided not to include TD in this comparison. This is likely because 10 0 10 1 10 2 10 3 10 4

> Shared+Sym Run Time (seconds)
> 10 0
> 10 1
> 10 2
> 10 3
> 10 4
> NoShared Run Time (seconds)
> Runtime Comparison: NoShared vs Shared+Sym
> Completed instances (189)
> Timeouts (75)

Figure 1: Comparing the runtimes of d4 -dyn (NoShared , DLCS )and d4 -dyn (Shared+Sym , DLCS )

the tree decomposition computed for Φi becomes struc-turally unsuitable for Φi+1 due to the significant changes in the underlying argumentation framework. Moreover, we observed that Shared vs. Shared+Sym 

produces almost the same results (see below for more on that). As such, we focus on the comparison between 

NoShared and Shared+Sym configurations across all benchmarks, as can be seen in Figure 1. Each point in the plot corresponds to a sequence of formulas derived from a specific AF benchmarks. The y-axis shows the runtime of 

d4 -dyn in the NoShared mode, while the x-axis shows the runtime in the Shared+Sym mode. As can be seen, in most cases Shared+Sym yields a sub-stantial performance gains, with a total improvement rate of 5000% on average (1200% median). We notice that this gain is particular for faster repositories. Specifically, improve-ment could vary between 20000% on faster benchmarks to almost even a minor slow down of a couple of percents on more complex or slower benchmarks. We suspect that this behavior arises because the benefits of caching dimin-ish as benchmarks increase in complexity. In particular, the memory cost of maintaining the full formula context in the shared caching scheme can be prohibitive compared to the 

NoShared mode, which generally maintains a significantly smaller cache footprint. For Shared vs Shared+Sym , the difference was minor and on average is 4% in favor of using symmetry. We sus-pect that the small gain of using symmetry is that the 1000 instances in each repository are similar, with the same vari-able names (since all benchmarks originate from the same source). In these cases, using symmetry that intends to ex-ploit similar structures between benchmarks, differ only in the variables names, is mostly redundant. 

Cache-hits Analysis To better understand the impact of shared caching, we analyze a specific AF benchmark: 

af input exp cycles indvary 2 step 1 batch yyy 01 . This benchmark comprises a sequence of a 1000 formulas, each with a small model count (2, 3, or 4). While the NoShared 

mode times out after solving 921 benchmarks, both shared caching modes successfully complete the entire sequence. Specifically, Shared and Shared+Sym achieve runtime improvements of 78% and 121%, respectively, over the 

NoShared baseline. 0 25 50 75 100 125 150 175 200 

> number of instances solved
> 10 0
> 10 1
> 10 2
> 10 3
> time (in seconds)
> Argumentation - Model Counter comparison
> ganak (148/264)
> d4-dyn(Shared+sym) (203/264)
> d4 (167/264) Figure 2: Evaluating the runtime of each method.

Our observation is that in all three modes of operation, the first iteration takes roughly the same runtime. As the run progresses, however, time differences start to become evident in favor of the shared-cache modes. To understand the reason behind this behavior, we checked the total pos-itive and negative cache hits (= cache hits / misses, resp.) for the entire run. Regarding positive hits, there are 0 posi-tive cache hits during the entire run of the NoShared mode on this repository, opposed to 766 on the Shared mode and 764 on Shared+Sym . On the other hand, for negative hits, there are 71691 negative hits on the NoShared mode on this repository, opposed to only 19758 ( Shared ) and 17588 (Shared+Sym ). This implies that the runtime of the shared modes should indeed become faster as less branching and re-cursion is done on the formulas in order to count their mod-els. 

Answering RQ3 We ran our tool against other state-of-the-art tools. For that we executed baseline model coun-ters on each repository of argumentation frameworks using a simple bash script loop. Our evaluation comprises the following three experimental setups shown in Figure 2. We aimed to run the baseline tools with their default setting: (i) our tool d4-dyn (orange) on a Shared+Sym mode with DLCS branching heuristic; (ii) d4 (Lagniez, Lonca, and Marquis 2016) (green) with Glucose as a SAT solver, flow cutter disabled and no preprocessing; (iii) ganak (blue) with default settings. We also tried comparing with PBCount2 but were lim-ited to its Regular mode, as its Incremental mode is incom-patible with our crustabri -based batch workflow. After translating CNF files to the required .opb format, PBCount2 (Regular) solved 50 of 264 benchmark families, well below the other tools and therefore is not shown in the plot. Overall, d4 -dyn solves 203 benchmarks, compared to 167 for d4 and 148 with ganak . We must qualify these results by noting a structural advantage: d4 -dyn operates as a per-sistent process, incurring initialization costs only once. In contrast, competing solvers are re-invoked for each formula, accumulating significant overhead from repeated process in-stantiation. 

7.3 Soft Cores 

Problem Definition The notion of a soft core was intro-duced in (Audemard et al. 2022) as a concept to explain why some system behaviors are exhibited while others are excluded. A soft core is a subset of constraints that is both small and highly constrained, meaning it admits only a lim-ited number of models. Identifying a soft core is naturally a bi-criteria optimization problem, where both the size of the subset and the number of models are relevant. Depending on the context, one may prioritize minimizing soft core size or reducing model count. However, computing a minimal soft core is NP PP -hard (Littman, Goldsmith, and Mundhenk 1998), making optimal solutions already infeasible for in-stances with more than 10 variables. In our work, we consider a slightly modified variant, which searches for a minimal subset soft core. To achieve this, we employ a simple iterative strategy. For that recall that removal of clauses increases the model-count. Starting from the original formula, we do a single iteration over all clauses, in which we remove one clause at a time and check the new model count. If that model count is still below the threshold, we keep the index of that clause and continue. Otherwise, we return the clause to the formula and continue to the next clause. We return a set of the indices of the re-moved clauses. We use d4 -dyn ’s add and remove clause framework to interactively remove clauses according to the soft core algo-rithm. We use a threshold of δ = 20 percent for all our tests. An example for a typical run in this mode is giving a CNF formula as an input to d4 -dyn for our baseline soft core ap-plication (described in RQ3). The tool would modify that CNF #Clauses times and run model counting for each s.t. 

Φ1 is the original CNF and Φi is the modified CNF in the 

i’th iteration of the soft core algorithm. Finally, the algo-rithm outputs the set of clauses comprising the soft core. We evaluate 3040 formulas across 6 families, including circuit, planning, and competition benchmarks (details in Appendix A.3). A benchmark is considered solved only if all its constituent instances are processed without timeout. We excluded from our comparisons benchmarks that timed out on all the tools. The families are also classified into 5 runtime intervals, according to the runtime of solving Φ1

with d4. This was done to better observe the difference be-tween benchmarks in which already the first CNF instance is easier/harder to solve. 

Evaluation Details Answering RQ1 Consistent with the argumentation re-sults, DLCS outperforms VSADS by comparable margins. Consequently, we employ DLCS as the default branching heuristic for the remainder of our evaluation. 

Answering RQ2 Table 1 aggregates the results for d4 -dyn 

across its three caching modes, evaluated both with and without shared tree decompositions (six configurations in total), plus the external tools PBCount2 and ganak . To compare against PBCount2 , we translated the CNFs of our experiments to OPB format that PBCount2 accepts as input and created an input script of add and remove clause com-mands to input to PBCount2 ’s incremental mode, in order to emulate our soft core algorithm. Our experiments showed that PBCount2 timed-out on almost all benchmarks from the 0-1s and 1-10s interval categories, leading us to conclude Table 1: Best solver for each Soft Core benchmark family by runtime category                 

> Family 0–1s 1–10s 10–100s 100–1000s 1000–10000s
> BMS (500) –S (223/242) G:0/242 S (238/254) G:0/254 SS (3/4) G:0/4 –CBS (1000) –S (344/344) G:0/344 S (646/656) G:0/656 ––mcCompetition (113) SS+TD (16/50) G:18/50 NS+TD (24/34) G:2/34 SS (10/27) G:2/27 SS+TD (1/1) G:0/1 SS+TD (1/1) G:0/1 or (434) SS (189/193) G:0/193 SS (83/108) G:1/108 SS+TD (11/61) *G(42/61) SS+TD (2/72) *G(70/72) –planning (616) SS (133/199) G:2/199 SS (41/120) G:0/120 S+TD (35/124) G:1/124 NS+TD (21/83) G:1/83 S+TD (60/90) G:6/90 rnd3sat (377) SS (234/284) G:0/284 SS (88/89) G:0/89 SS (4/4) G:0/4 ––Legend: NS = NoShared, S = Shared, SS = Shared+Sym, +TD = with Tree Decomposition. G = ganak .
> Tool (X/Y) indicates that Tool outperformed the others tools in X out of Y benchmarks in that cell.

that its usage of knowledge compilation based model count-ing may not be suitable for the purpose of our experimental setups. In order to evaluate our approach with ganak (in default mode with no extra parameters), we created a soft core tool in C++, based on our own soft core algorithm, that calls ganak as a black box for the model counting tasks. Since these system calls are being run in a loop sequentially, they cannot share cache or any other information with each other, as opposed to our tool. Table 1 should be read as follows. Each line in the ta-ble describes a family of benchmarks with the number of benchmarks that completed the computation (i.e. did not time-out) for at least one tool. We checked in how many benchmarks each tool outperformed the others, in terms of runtime. Each cell in the table has in top (black), the d4 -dyn 

mode that won the most benchmarks in its category (family + time interval), while the bottom (brown) shows the num-ber of times that ganak outperformed the other tools. The cases in which ganak won overall more benchmarks than any mode of d4 -dyn are marked with (*). We first discuss the comparison of our own modes. Ta-ble 1 clearly demonstrates that Shared+Sym outperforms 

NoShared on easier benchmarks, solving more instances across families such as BMS , CBS , rnd3sat , or , and plan-ning (within a 10-second runtime threshold). Similarly to AFs, the lazy symmetry mode added an extra minor boost to the runtime improvement, but the major boost came from us-ing shared cache across benchmarks. On more challenging benchmarks, such as those from model counting competition and the harder intervals for planning and or families, Tree decomposition sharing becomes increasingly beneficial. For simpler benchmarks, the initial overhead of computing a tree decomposition may exceed the potential search time sav-ings. However, for harder benchmarks this investment pays off; the TD-enabled modes successfully completed several runs where non-TD modes timed out. Among the TD con-figurations, Shared modes achieved improvements up to 50%, though they occasionally favored the NS+TD configu-ration in specific categories (see Appendix A.2 for detailed comparisons). Mirroring our AF results, these results sug-gest that while cache sharing is highly effective in easier set-tings, its utility diminishes as complexity increases, at which point shared structural information like tree decompositions becomes the primary driver of efficiency. 

Answering RQ3 We next compare d4 -dyn against 

ganak . As shown in Table 1, d4 -dyn exhibits superior performance on easier benchmarks. This advantage stems from our integrated framework, which facilitates knowledge sharing and avoids the repeated process initialization over-head inherent in ganak ’s baseline execution. On the harder benchmarks on which ganak is known to be better (Fichte and Hecher 2025) it shines, especially since, as discussed before, there is less utility in sharing on the harder bench-marks. Specifically, on harder benchmarks, ganak ’s spe-cialized search techniques allow it to excel, particularly as the marginal utility of cache sharing diminishes with in-creasing problem complexity. Notably, ganak exhibits ex-ceptional performance on the or benchmarks, where its ro-bust pre-processing is often sufficient to solve instances en-tirely without further search. This is further illustrated in Figure 3, which compares the runtime of d4 -dyn ’s opti-mal configuration against that of ganak across all bench-marks. These results corroborate Table 1, demonstrating that 

d4 -dyn outperforms ganak on the majority of benchmark families, with the or benchmarks remaining a notable excep-tion, where ganak ’s efficiency is most pronounced.    

> Figure 3: Runtimes of d4 -dyn best mode vs ganak

All in all, our results demonstrate the consistent advantage of knowledge reuse across nearly all benchmarks. While shared caching and symmetry often suffice to improve per-formance, the reuse of tree decompositions proves particu-larly effective for the most challenging benchmarks. 

# 8 Conclusion 

In this work, we tailored an incremental model counter, 

d4 -dyn , that rather than treating each benchmark inde-pendently, re-uses both cache information and branching-heuristic knowledge between benchmarks to exploit their similarities. We evaluated our approach on dynamic argu-mentation benchmarks, where syntactic similarity is crucial, for which we showed how our sharing techniques improve over existing solvers. We also considered the computation of minimal subset soft cores, showing that our framework can leverage cache and heuristic reuse to improve efficiency in this setting, and outperforms existing tools using bench-marks taken from competitions. Our results highlight the benefits of cache reuse within our benchmark sequences. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work to ex-ploit cache and heuristic reuse across multiple benchmarks in DPLL-based model counting. As this paper introduces a novel setting, it serves as a foundational first step. In both problems that we chose, model counting and the notion of incrementality is natural. Showing that our framework can handle further problems is a promising future work that we intend on pursuing. 

# Acknowledgements 

This work has been partly supported by the CERADOC project of the French National Agency for Research (ANR-25-CE23-3078). We thank Mate Soos for his advice during the early stages of this work. We thank the reviewers for their insights and suggestions that helped improve this pa-per. 

# References 

Astesana, J.; Cosserat, L.; and Fargier, H. 2010. Constraint-based Vehicle Configuration: A Case Study. In 22nd IEEE International Conference on Tools with Artificial Intelli-gence, ICTAI .Audemard, G.; Lagniez, J.; Miceli, M.; and Roussel, O. 2022. Identifying Soft Cores in Propositional Formulæ. In 

Proceedings of the 14th International Conference on Agents and Artificial Intelligence, ICAART .Bart, A.; Koriche, F.; Lagniez, J.; and Marquis, P. 2014. Symmetry-Driven Decision Diagrams for Knowledge Com-pilation. In ECAI - 21st European Conference on Artificial Intelligence - Including Prestigious Applications of Intelli-gent Systems (PAIS) .Besnard, P., and Doutre, S. 2004. Checking the acceptabil-ity of a set of arguments. In Delgrande, J. P., and Schaub, T., eds., 10th International Workshop on Non-Monotonic Rea-soning (NMR 2004), Whistler, Canada, June 6-8, 2004, Pro-ceedings , 59–64. Bistarelli, S.; Kotthoff, L.; Lagniez, J.-M.; Lonca, E.; Mailly, J.-G.; Rossit, J.; Santini, F.; and Taticchi, C. 2024. The third and fourth international competitions on computa-tional models of argumentation: Design, results and analy-sis. Argument & Computation AAC–230013. Bodlaender, H. L. 2005. Discovering treewidth. In Vojt´ as, P.; Bielikov´ a, M.; Charron-Bost, B.; and S´ ykora, O., eds., 

SOFSEM 2005: Theory and Practice of Computer Science, 31st Conference on Current Trends in Theory and Practice of Computer Science, Liptovsk´ y J´ an, Slovakia, January 22-28, 2005, Proceedings , volume 3381 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science , 1–16. Springer. crillab. 2025. crustabri. https://github.com/crillab/crustabri. Darwiche, A. 2004. New Advances in Compiling CNF into Decomposable Negation Normal Form. In Proceedings of the 16th Eureopean Conference on Artificial Intelligence, ECAI .Domshlak, C., and Hoffmann, J. 2006. Fast Probabilistic Planning through Weighted Model Counting. In Proceed-ings of the Sixteenth International Conference on Automated Planning and Scheduling, ICAPS .Dubois, O.; Andr´ e, P.; Boufkhad, Y.; and Carlier, J. 1993. SAT versus UNSAT. In Johnson, D. S., and Trick, M. A., eds., Cliques, Coloring, and Satisfiability, Proceedings of a DIMACS Workshop, New Brunswick, New Jersey, USA, Oc-tober 11-13, 1993 , volume 26 of DIMACS Series in Discrete Mathematics and Theoretical Computer Science , 415–436. DIMACS/AMS. Dung, P. M. 1993. On the Acceptability of Arguments and its Fundamental Role in Nonmonotonic Reasoning and Logic Programming. In Proceedings of the 13th Interna-tional Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence. , 852–859. Morgan Kaufmann. Fichte, J. K., and Hecher, M. 2025. The model counting competitions 2021-2023. CoRR abs/2504.13842. Fichte, J. K.; Hecher, M.; and Hamiti, F. 2021. The model counting competition 2020. ACM J. Exp. Algorithmics .Gomes, C. P.; Sabharwal, A.; and Selman, B. 2021. Model Counting. In Handbook of Satisfiability - Second Edition ,volume 336. IOS Press. 993–1014. Illner, P. 2025. New compilation languages based on re-stricted weak decomposability. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence 39:14987–14996. Izza, Y.; Huang, X.; Ignatiev, A.; Narodytska, N.; Cooper, M. C.; and Marques-Silva, J. 2023. On computing proba-bilistic abductive explanations. Int. J. Approx. Reason. 

J¨ arvisalo, M.; Lehtonen, T.; and Niskanen, A. 2023. In-ternational Competition on Computational Models of Argu-mentation. Jeroslow, R. G., and Wang, J. 1990. Solving propositional satisfiability problems. Ann. Math. Artif. Intell. 1:167–187. Korhonen, T., and J¨ arvisalo, M. 2021. Integrating Tree Decompositions into Decision Heuristics of Propositional Model Counters (Short Paper). In 27th International Con-ference on Principles and Practice of Constraint Program-ming, CP .Koriche, F.; Lagniez, J.; Marquis, P.; and Thomas, S. 2013. Knowledge Compilation for Model Counting: Affine Deci-sion Trees. In Rossi, F., ed., Proceedings of the 23rd Inter-national Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI .Lagniez, J., and Lonca, E. 2024. Leveraging Decision-DNNF Compilation for Enumerating Disjoint Partial Mod-els. In Proceedings of the 21st International Conference on Principles of Knowledge Representation and Reasoning, KR .Lagniez, J., and Marquis, P. 2017. An Improved Decision-DNNF Compiler. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Sixth Inter-national Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI .Lagniez, J., and Marquis, P. 2019. A Recursive Algorithm for Projected Model Counting. In The Thirty-Third Confer-ence on Artificial Intelligence, AAAI .Lagniez, J., and Marquis, P. 2021. About Caching in D4 2.0. Lagniez, J.; Lonca, E.; Mailly, J.-G.; and Rossit, J. 2021. The Fourth International Competition on Computational Models of Argumentation. Lagniez, J.; Lonca, E.; and Marquis, P. 2016. Improving Model Counting by Leveraging Definability. In Proceed-ings of the Twenty-Fifth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI .Littman, M. L.; Goldsmith, J.; and Mundhenk, M. 1998. The Computational Complexity of Probabilistic Planning. J. Artif. Intell. Res. 9:1–36. Moskewicz, M. W.; Madigan, C. F.; Zhao, Y.; Zhang, L.; and Malik, S. 2001. Chaff: Engineering an efficient SAT solver. In Proceedings of the 38th Design Automation Conference, DAC 2001, Las Vegas, NV, USA, June 18-22, 2001 , 530–535. ACM. Muise, C. J.; McIlraith, S. A.; Beck, J. C.; and Hsu, E. I. 2012. Dsharp: Fast d-DNNF Compilation with sharpSAT. In Advances in Artificial Intelligence - 25th Canadian Con-ference on Artificial Intelligence, AI .Nadel, A., and Ryvchin, V. 2012. Efficient SAT Solving under Assumptions. In Theory and Applications of Satisfia-bility Testing, SAT .Nadel, A. 2010. Boosting minimal unsatisfiable core ex-traction. In Proceedings of 10th International Conference on Formal Methods in Computer-Aided Design, FMCAD .Oztok, U., and Darwiche, A. 2015. A Top-Down Com-piler for Sentential Decision Diagrams. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Fourth International Joint Conference on Artifi-cial Intelligence, IJCAI .Palacios, H.; Bonet, B.; Darwiche, A.; and Geffner, H. 2005. Pruning Conformant Plans by Counting Models on Com-piled d-DNNF Representations. In Proceedings of the Fif-teenth International Conference on Automated Planning and Scheduling, ICAPS .Robertson, N., and Seymour, P. D. 1986. Graph minors. II. algorithmic aspects of tree-width. J. Algorithms 7(3):309– 322. Rotstein, N. D.; Moguillansky, M. O.; Garc´ ıa, A. J.; and Simari, G. R. 2010. A Dynamic Argumentation Framework. In Computational Models of Argument, COMMA .Sang, T.; Beame, P.; and Kautz, H. A. 2005. Heuristics for fast exact model counting. In Bacchus, F., and Walsh, T., eds., Theory and Applications of Satisfiability Testing, 8th International Conference, SAT 2005, St. Andrews, UK, June 19-23, 2005, Proceedings , volume 3569 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science , 226–240. Springer. Sang, T.; Bacchus, F.; Beame, P.; Kautz, H. A.; and Pitassi, T. 2004. Combining Component Caching and Clause Learn-ing for Effective Model Counting. In The Seventh Interna-tional Conference on Theory and Applications of Satisfiabil-ity Testing, SAT .Sharma, S.; Roy, S.; Soos, M.; and Meel, K. S. 2019. GANAK: A Scalable Probabilistic Exact Model Counter. In 

Proceedings of the Twenty-Eighth International Joint Con-ference on Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI .Soos, M., and Meel, K. S. 2025. Engineering an efficient probabilistic exact model counter. In Piskac, R., and Raka-maric, Z., eds., Computer Aided Verification - 37th Interna-tional Conference, CAV 2025, Zagreb, Croatia, July 23-25, 2025, Proceedings, Part III , volume 15933 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science , 72–91. Springer. Sundermann, C.; Raab, H.; Heß, T.; Th¨ um, T.; and Schae-fer, I. 2024. Reusing d-DNNFs for Efficient Feature-Model Counting. ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol. 

Thurley, M. 2006. sharpSAT - Counting Models with Ad-vanced Component Caching and Implicit BCP. In Theory and Applications of Satisfiability Testing, SAT .Valiant, L. G. 1979. The complexity of enumeration and reliability problems. SIAM J. Comput. 

Yang, S., and Meel, K. S. 2025. Towards projected and incremental pseudo-boolean model counting. Pro-ceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence 

39(11):11399–11407. Yang, S.; Lai, Y.; and Meel, K. S. 2025. On top-down pseudo-boolean model counting. In Berg, J., and Nord-str¨ om, J., eds., 28th International Conference on Theory and Applications of Satisfiability Testing, SAT 2025, Glasgow, Scotland, August 12-15, 2025 , volume 341 of LIPIcs , 31:1– 31:10. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum f¨ ur Informatik. A Supplementary Material 

A.1 Families of Argumentation Frameworks 

We describe the families of benchmarks that we used in our Argumentation Framework experiments. We use 263 CNF repositories from the 2023 Abstract Argumentation Compe-tition, grouped into 14 datasets, for each family of reposi-tories we list the minimal, maximal and average size of the argumentation frameworks in that repository. 

Repository #Benchmarks Min Max Average 

admbuster 10 1000 200161 40170.95 

afinput 25 108 1517 418.50 

bw 2 108 1517 418.50 

BA 25 101 339 220.70 

cities 25 116 8079 446.20 

ER 25 101 453 262.21 

g 25 1160 3821 2373.85 

medium 19 2914 2948 2931.73 

n 15 100 405 235.25 

scc 25 226 1963 1226.60 

sembuster 15 150 1643 847.78 

small 2 191 338 267.18 

st 25 319 585 465.57 

WS 25 100 644 298.95 

> Table 2: Statistics of the argumentation framework repositories.

A.2 Additional Soft Core Comparisons 

We describe the comparison that we made between the dif-ferent modes of our tool. Figure 4 Compares the run times of d4 -dyn (NoShared )and d4 -dyn (Shared+Sym ) modes without TD sharing. As can be seen, plot highlights the performance gain of using Shared+Sym, especially on easier benchmarks.        

> Figure 4: runtimes of d4 -dyn (NoShared )and d4 -dyn
> (Shared+Sym ) modes without TD sharing.

Figure 5 compares the run times of d4 -dyn (NoShared 

and d4 -dyn (Shared+Sym ) modes with TD sharing. As can be seen, this plot highlights the performance gain of us-ing TD, but the gain from Shared+Sym is more moderate.        

> Figure 5: runtimes of d4 -dyn (NoShared and d4 -dyn
> (Shared+Sym ) modes with TD sharing.

Finally, Figure 6 Compares the run times of d4 -dyn 

(Shared+Sym , DLCS ) modes and without without TD sharing. As can be seen, this plot highlights the gain of us-ing TD sharing on harder benchmarks, and that it is better not to use it on easier benchmarks.     

> Figure 6: runtimes of d4 -dyn (Shared+Sym ,DLCS ) modes and without without TD sharing.

A.3 Families of Soft core Benchmarks 

Table 3 below describes our soft core benchmarks, catego-rized by families. Each line describes the family name, num-ber of benchmarks, number of benchmarks that had a suc-cessful run on at least one tool (#w/oT TOs), and a descrip-tion of the family. Dataset # # w/o TOs Description BMS 500 500 Benchmarks from the Boolean Model Counting Suite. Considered easier. CBS 1000 1000 Circuit-based SAT instances, often derived from hardware verification problems. Con-sidered easier. mcBenches 784 113 Benchmarks taken from the model counting competitions of 2021–2024 designed to stress-test solver performance. Considered harder. or 660 434 Operations research benchmark family. Considered harder when not using prepro-cessing but easier with preprocessing enabled. planning 951 616 Miscellaneous SAT instances from various domains such as Random synthetic SATLIB constructions (Schur, Skolem, Ramsey), Blasted, Scenarios, Countdump, NoCountDump, Circuit-derived Benchmarks, PDDL, qg, Controller verification Benchmarks, Empty Room, Blocks world, Ring navigation, UTS, Logistics, Sort-ing/Numbering tasks, Flip/No-Action Planning. rnd3sat 410 377 Randomly generated 3-SAT formulas. Considered easy to mid-range.