Title: TailNLG: A Multilingual Benchmark Addressing Verbalization of Long-Tail Entities

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.27768v1

Published Time: Tue, 31 Mar 2026 01:56:23 GMT

Number of Pages: 18

Markdown Content:
# TailNLG: A Multilingual Benchmark Addressing Verbalization of Long-Tail Entities 

Lia Draetta 1, Michael Oliverio 1, Virginia Ramón-Ferrer 2, Pier Felice Balestrucci 1,Flaviana Corallo 1, Carlos Badenes-Olmedo 2, Alessandro Mazzei 1,

Marco Antonio Stranisci 1, Rossana Damiano 1

> 1

University of Turin, Italy 2Universidad Politécnica de Madrid, Spain  

> Correspondence: lia.draetta@unito.it

Abstract 

Automatic verbalization of structured knowl-edge is a key task for making knowledge graphs accessible to non-expert users and supporting retrieval-augmented generation systems. Al-though recent advances in Data-to-Text gen-eration have improved multilingual coverage, little attention has been paid to potential biases in the verbalization of rare entities, frequently known as long-tail entities. In this work, we present the first systematic study of long-tail en-tities in Data-to-Text generation. We introduce TailNLG 1, a new multilingual benchmark in English, Italian, and Spanish, built from Wiki-data and covering entities with varying levels of popularity. We evaluated three different fam-ilies of large language models in zero-shot set-tings and compared their performance on rare 

versus common entities, as well as against the established WebNLG benchmark. Our results reveal a consistent bias against long-tail entities: embedding-based scores are lower, and model uncertainty is higher for rare entities. We fur-ther show that the impact of long-tail entities varies across models and languages and that existing evaluation metrics do not consistently capture these differences, highlighting the need for more reliable evaluation frameworks. 

1 Introduction 

Automatic conversion of structured information into human-readable text is a crucial task for mak-ing knowledge accessible to a broad audience. The information contained in knowledge graphs (KGs), catalogues, and taxonomies is typically accessible only to domain experts, whereas the general public requires it to be expressed in natural language. This need also extends to retrieval-augmented genera-tion (RAG) technologies, which leverage textual knowledge bases to improve the safety and account-ability of large language models (LLMs).      

> 1Full code and Benchmark available here https://anonymous.4open.science/r/ TailNLG-benchmark-B339/README.md

Figure 1: Distribution of entities by claims in the Wiki-data category Artist . A small number of entities are associated with many claims, while the majority (long-tail) are associated with few relations. The red dashed line indicates the Pareto cut-off, while the green dashed line marks the head–tail threshold 

Despite advancements in this field and the grow-ing number of multilingual resources (Ferreira et al., 2018; Shimorina et al., 2019; Cripwell et al., 2023; Oliverio et al., 2025; Ramón-Ferrer et al., 2025), there is a lack of work aimed at uncovering biases in the verbalization of structured knowledge (Blodgett et al., 2020). Specifically, an open chal-lenge is to gain a deeper understanding of how LLMs handle rare entities, frequently known as 

long-tail entities, and whether their performance differs when compared to well-known entities. Al-though it has been demonstrated that LLMs exhibit performance drops when handling rare entities in tasks such as entity linking (Boscariol et al., 2024), representation of factual knowledge (Sun et al., 2024), and question answering (Hogan et al., 2025), no prior work has conducted an in-depth investi-gation of how different models handle long-tail entities in Data-to-Text generation. In this work, we tackle this gap by presenting the first systematic study of long-tail entities in Data-to-Text verbalization. We focus on RDF-to-Text 

> arXiv:2603.27768v1 [cs.CL] 29 Mar 2026

verbalization, as the Resource Description Frame-work (RDF) is a standard data model for represent-ing information in Knowledge Graphs, encoding data as triples in the form 〈subject, relation, ob-ject 〉. Acknowledging the socio-cultural factors that can determine the rarity of an entity (Adams et al., 2019; Stranisci et al., 2023), we adopt a mul-tilingual approach. Our study introduces TailNLG ,a novel multilingual RDF-to-Text benchmark cov-ering three languages (English, Italian, and Span-ish). The dataset contains triples extracted from Wikidata (Vrandeˇ ci´ c and Krötzsch, 2014), includ-ing entities from different categories and spanning varying levels of popularity, from top-head (most well-known) to long-tail (less well-known) entities. Through the creation of TailNLG, our work ad-dresses the following research questions: • [RQ1] Do LLMs perform differently in the verbalization of rare entities, and does lan-guage impact the verbalization output? • [RQ2] Is the model uncertainty higher when dealing with rare versus common entities in the verbalization task, and how does model performance differ when comparing a long-tail benchmark (TailNLG) with a well-established resource such as WebNLG? To this end, three families of LLMs are assessed on the verbalization of long-tail entities in two set-tings: (i) comparing them with head entities within the TailNLG corpus, and (ii) comparing them with WebNLG (Gardent et al., 2017b), the established benchmark for the RDF-to-Text task. We assess performance with a diverse set of automatic mea-sures, capturing semantic similarity, surface-level overlap with reference texts, and Perplexity (PPL) (Jelinek et al., 1977) to quantify model uncertainty. Our results show that LLMs have a systematic bias against long-tail entities: embedding-based metrics tend to be lower for long-tail entities and models’ uncertainty in text generation of triple containing long-tail entities is almost always higher. In addi-tion, language-specific bias also plays a role in the verbalization of long-tail entities. Analysis of PPL scores reveals that embedding-based and overlap-based metrics fail to systematically quantify their impact on verbalization, demonstrating that a more reliable evaluation framework of fairness in RDF-to-Text is needed. 

2 Related Work 

Long-tail entities are generally understood as those that occur with low frequency across large scale data sources, including training corpora (Kandpal et al., 2023), Wikipedia (Mallen et al., 2023), and large knowledge bases such as Wikidata (Kumar et al., 2024). Recent work has shown that LLMs exhibit a marked decline in performance when processing long-tail inputs (Graciotti et al., 2025; Hogan et al., 2025; Li et al., 2024; Sun et al., 2024) and that LLMs memorization is highly influenced by the frequency of information in the pretraining data (Kandpal et al., 2023). Several task-specific evaluations further confirm this pattern. Boscar-iol et al. (2024) find that entity linking is partic-ularly difficult for rare entities when comparing various LLMs with ReLiK (Orlando et al., 2024), a state-of-the-art (SoTA) entity linking and relation extraction system. GRADES, an evaluation frame-work for graph-based question answering (Draetta et al., 2025), shows that SoTA models struggle with rare entities at multiple stages; in particular, verbalization suffers from limited semantic under-standing of long-tail entities. In knowledge extrac-tion, Graciotti et al. (2025) introduce KEMISTO, a benchmark centered on low-popularity entities, and demonstrate that LLMs perform significantly worse on it and exhibit systematic biased failures. A similar pattern emerges in question answering: using a benchmark spanning head, torso, and tail entities, Sun et al. (2024) show that accuracy con-sistently declines as entity frequency decreases, confirming that limited training exposure hampers LLMs’ knowledge of long-tail entities. Despite increasing attention to long-tail evalua-tion, no existing work specifically examines how well LLMs verbalize information when required to handle rare entities. In the context of Data-to-Text, the task of verbalizing RDF triples in NLP has evolved substantially, driven both by template-based NLG systems and more recent neural approaches. Early work focused on hand-crafted or automatically induced templates, which provided high precision and strong control over the output, but suffered from limited scalability and reduced the ability to generalize beyond predefined patterns (Duma and Klein, 2013). With the advent of neural encoder–decoder architectures, particularly LSTM-based triple encoders and later transformer models, RDF-to-Text generation became considerably more flexible, enabling fluent and information-rich verbalizations that better capture lexical and syntactic variation (Distiawan et al., 2018; Oliverio et al., 2024). Nevertheless, challenges related to factual consistency and robustness to unseen entities have motivated a series of enhancements to transformer-based systems. For example, integrating reward signals derived from information-extraction models has been shown to improve factual accuracy (Gao et al., 2021), while leveraging large external corpora, pre-training noise processes, and data augmentation strategies leads to more resilient generalization, particularly in low-resource or zero-shot scenarios (Montella et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2023). To support systematic development and evalu-ation of this task, the WebNLG benchmark has emerged as one of the primary datasets for RDF-to-Text, providing multiple versions, multilingual extensions, and low-resource configurations that have enabled extensive comparative studies across approaches and languages (Gardent et al., 2017b; Castro Ferreira et al., 2020). 

3 The TailNLG Benchmark 

Since no benchmark currently targets long-tail triple–verbalization pairs, we introduce T AIL NLG, the first dataset specifically designed for long-tail verbalization. Inspired by Gardent et al. (2017b), we created the TailNLG benchmark following the same procedure employed by the authors, from the entity extraction strategy to verbalization, with the aim of facilitating the use of data by adhering to a standard structure. Constructing the benchmark in three languages adds another layer of complexity, as rare entities may not be consistently represented across multilingual resources. We prioritized high data quality by incorporating human evaluation and correction at each stage of the pipeline. 

3.1 Entities Selection 

To be consistent with previous resources, we fol-lowed the extraction methodology proposed by Gar-dent et al. (2017a) by selecting the same entity categories. Although there is not yet a widely ac-cepted and unambiguous definition of long-tail en-tities (Jiang and Joshi, 2024; Boscariol et al., 2024; Kumar et al., 2024), following Sun et al. (2024) we took into consideration two main criteria in defining long-tail entities: (i) the number of claims   

> Figure 2: PPL distributions for head and long-tail enti-ties across models (log10 scale). Boxes represent the in-terquartile range (IQR, Q1–Q3) with the median shown as a line inside the box. Statistical significance was assessed using the Mann-Whitney U test : *** p < 0.001, ns = not significant.

(Wikidata relations) linked to a certain entity and (ii) the number of Wikipedia pages an entity has. Firstly, we set a threshold based on the number of claims linked to each entity. As noted by Kumar et al. (2024), large-scale resources such as Wiki-data typically follow a Zipf-like distribution, where a small number of entities are associated with many claims while the vast majority with few. Based on a subset of 20 , 000 entities for each category (com-plete list of categories in Table 4 in Appendix D) we define the long-tail threshold using a Pareto cut-off: we compute the minimum number of claims required for an entity to fall within the top 20% of entities that account for 80% of all claims (the head). Entities below this threshold are classified as long-tail. Since claim distributions differ across categories, we compute the cut-off separately for each category. Figure 1 shows an example of the threshold for the categories Artists: a small number of entities exhibit a very high number of claims, while the vast majority fall into a long-tail distribu-tion. To further refine the set of long-tail entities below the Pareto cut-off, we additionally select those that have a Wikipedia page only in one of the three target languages (e.g., entities with Wikipedia page in English but not in Italian and Spanish). In summary, we categorize entities into: (i) 

long-tail entities , whose number of claims falls below the Pareto cut-off, such as Do˘ gan Güzel 

(Q268285), a Turkish cartoonist; and (ii) Head entities , whose number of claims exceeds the Pareto cut-off, such as London (Q84) or Google 

(Q95). To examine model confidence on long-tail vs. 

head entities, assessing the reliability of the TailNLG dataset, we compute the average Per-plexity (PPL) as a proxy for model uncertainty across LLMs of different families and sizes (see Section 4). For each model, the entity string is tok-enized using the model’s corresponding tokenizer, and PPL is computed as the exponential of the av-erage negative log-likelihood of the resulting token sequence. Results in Figure 2 show that long-tail entities exhibit higher PPL than head entities, indi-cating greater model uncertainty when processing long-tail entities. This trend supports the reliabil-ity of our entity extraction methodology and the overall quality of the dataset. Details of the PPL calculations are provided in Appendix A. 

3.2 Triples Extraction 

The next step was to extract data units for each entity. We define a data unit as a set of RDF triples, each consisting of a subject, a predicate, and an object (e.g., Jet Li, place of birth, Beijing). To ob-tain diverse data units that vary in relation type and size, we followed Perez-Beltrachini et al. (2016) and extracted units with different relational con-figurations: Chain where the object of one triple serves as the subject of another, Sibling where the triples share the same subject and mixed where the data unit contains both sibling and chain relations. Some examples in appendix B. For each QID (Wikidata entity ID), we auto-matically extracted from Wikidata, via a SPARQL query, a set of 10 data units per entity in the three languages. Since not all triples were available in all three languages, we further filtered the data units to ensure the alignment across languages, resulting in a set of parallel data units as exemplified below:                                           

> EN: [Solar, creator, Paul S. Newman], [Paul S. Newman, place of birth, Manhattan], [Paul S. Newman, award received, Inkpot Award]
> ES: [Solar, creator, Paul S. Newman], [Paul S. Newman, lugar de nacimiento, Manhattan], [Paul S. Newman, premio recibido, Premio Inkpot]
> IT: [Solar, creatore, Paul S. Newman], [Paul S. Newman, luogo di nascita, Manhattan], [Paul S. Newman, premio ricevuto, Premio Inkpot]

We obtained 1878 data units per language, di-vided into 1224 long-tail and 654 head entities. The complete distribution per category and type is in Appendix D. 

3.3 Verbalization 

To build the benchmark, we aimed to produce <Data_Unit, Verbalization > pairs for all data in all languages. Because manual verbalization is time consuming we adopted a two-step approach: we first manually verbalized a subset of data units for each language, then cross-translated them into the remaining languages using SoTA machine transla-tion models in a human-in-the-loop setup. The verbalization process was carried out on a subset of 689 data units by nine volunteer native speakers in the three languages. Annotators were proficient in at least two languages, allowing for a cross-check validation. They were instructed to ver-balize the triples as naturally as possible, producing grammatically correct and fluent sentences while following guidelines designed to promote natural-ness and ensure data homogeneity. All guidelines and some example of verbalization are reported in Appendix C.1. Annotators could skip a data unit if they judged it incorrect or incomplete. After ver-balization, a validation phase followed in which the annotators cross-checked each other’s output, confirming or revising the initial sentences (full guidelines in Appendix C.2). Ambiguous cases were discussed collectively before a final decision was made. Following this verbalization and cross-check process, 73 data units were excluded from the dataset. 

3.4 Translation 

The manual verbalization phase produced a to-tal of 616 gold verbalizations ( 130 in English, 

142 in Spanish, and 344 in Italian 2). To create a fully parallel dataset we adopted an approach based on Machine Translation (MT) and Automatic Post-Editing (APE), as proposed by Aditya Hari et al. (2023). Drawing on earlier studies on cross-lingual extensions of triples-to-Text datasets (Oliv-erio et al., 2025; Ramón-Ferrer et al., 2025), we leveraged DeepL for Automatic Translation 3. For each manually created verbalization in a source lan-guage (X) corresponding translations were automat-ically generated in the other two target languages (Y and Z), resulting in a total of 1,232 automatic generated translations. To mitigate known issues in MT, such as omis-sions and hallucinations (Jurafsky and Martin, 

> 2This linguistic imbalance is due to the varying availability of expert native-speaking annotators.
> 3https://www.deepl.com/translator

2025), we introduced an APE phase. To identify errors in the translations, we leveraged the 3.5B version of xCOMET Guerreiro et al. (2024) 4, a multilingual model for quality estimation and error span extraction. For each input, the model out-puts a sentence-level score (ranging from Excellent 

to Weak ), as well as an error spans detected field, which identifies potential errors and their positions within the sentence. Subsequently, for the error correction phase, we adopted xTOWER 5, a multilingual decoder-only model proposed by Treviso et al. (2024), designed to provide natural-language explanations of errors present in a translation and suggest a corrected version of the sentence (example of prompt and output in Appendix F.1). We perform error detec-tion and correction on all the MT translated data; the resulting output is a parallel dataset consisting of data units and verbalizations in Italian, Spanish and English as follows: 

> <lex quality="gold" lid="Id1" lang="en"> Themisthocles was born in Turkey and he was a citizen of the Classical Athens. Themistocles 's spouse is Archippe. </lex> <lex quality="silver" lid="Id2" lang="es"> Temístocles nació en Turquía y fue ciudadano de la Atenas clásica. El cónyuge de Temístocles es Arquippe. </lex> <lex quality="silver" lid="Id3" lang="it"> Temistocle è nato in Turchia ed era un cittadino dell 'Atene classica. La consorte di Temistocle era Archippe. </lex>

To ensure the quality of the silver dataset (pro-duced during the MT and APE phases), we man-ually evaluated sentences that were assigned a xCOMET sentence-level score below good (i.e., rated as moderate or weak ). We sampled 50 ver-balizations for each source–target language pair and involved eight volunteer native speakers with high proficiency in at least one of the considered language pairs (e.g., English and Italian). Each source-target language pair was annotated by two different annotators following a widely adopted tax-onomy for the evaluation of Accuracy and Fluency (Lommel et al., 2014) (evaluation guidelines in Ap-pendix F.2). In addition, we asked the annotators to propose a corrected version of the automatically translated verbalization, increasing the number of gold reference. In Table 1, the scores of the man-                                                    

> 4https://huggingface.com/Unbabel/XCOMET-XL
> 5https://huggingface.com/sardinelab/xTower13B
> Source →Target Accuracy Fluency
> es →en 4.45 ±0.58 4.99 ±0.07
> en →es 4.57 ±0.53 4.95 ±0.15
> it →en 4.71 ±0.49 4.89 ±0.32
> en →it 4.72 ±0.48 4.97 ±0.12
> es →it 4.51 ±0.49 4.91 ±0.22
> it →es 4.63 ±0.49 4.93 ±0.20

Table 1: Average scores ( 0 to 5) and standard deviation of the human evaluation on Accuracy e Fluency 

ual evaluation are reported. The annotators rated the sentences very highly across all language pairs, with Accuracy and Fluency consistently scoring above 4 on a scale from 0 to 5 (Inter-annotator agreement is reported in Appendix F.3). The high scores attributed to the silver standard suggest that the translated instances were considered reliable by evaluators, confirming the high quality of data, especially considering that the evaluation was con-ducted on inputs that received lower scores from xCOMET. After the translation and APE phases, we obtain a dataset of 1, 845 data units, consisting of 1, 120 

Gold and 725 Silver instances. The full distribution by language is reported in Table 5 in Appendix E. 

4 Methodology 

To study multilingual RDF-to-Text verbalization, we leverage three families of open state-of-the-art multilingual instruction-tuned models, each evaluated at two comparable sizes: Llama-3.2-3B-Instruct 6, Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct 7, Qwen2.5-3B-Instruct 8, Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct 9, Gemma-3-4B-IT 10 , and Gemma-3-12B-IT 11 . We focus on these model families because they are multilingual, widely used, and well established in the literature, openly available, and offered in moderate param-eter ranges that enable efficient and reproducible experimentation. 

4.1 Experimental Setup 

Given a set of RDF-style triples (s, p, o ), the sys-tem produces a single-paragraph natural language description in English, Spanish, or Italian. We run 

> 6https://huggingface.co/meta-llama/Llama-3. 2-3B-Instruct
> 7https://huggingface.co/meta-llama/Llama-3. 1-8B-Instruct
> 8https://huggingface.co/Qwen/Qwen2. 5-3B-Instruct
> 9https://huggingface.co/Qwen/Qwen2. 5-7B-Instruct
> 10 https://huggingface.co/google/gemma-3-4b-it
> 11 https://huggingface.co/google/gemma-3-12b-it

experiments on two datasets: (i) WebNLG, used as a baseline benchmark, and (ii) TailNLG, used to analyze performance on data unit containing long-tail entities. Since our goal is to study biases and examine how LLMs handle rare entities, we deliberately adopt a zero-shot approach to avoid influencing model outputs with external examples. Prompts are written English, Spanish, or Italian de-pending on the target verbalization. Full prompts are available in Appendix H. For each input we generate three candidate ver-balizations to capture decoding variability. We use stochastic decoding with temperature sampling (temperature = 0 .7), which increases output diver-sity compared to greedy decoding while keeping generations coherent. Generations are bounded by a fixed maximum length (max_new_tokens = 256 )to prevent overly long outputs and to standardize comparisons across models and settings. Experi-ments were conducted on a server with two Intel Xeon Gold 5418Y CPUs (48 physical cores each, 96 threads total), around 504 GB RAM, and two NVIDIA L40 GPUs with approximately 46 GB VRAM each. 

4.2 Evaluation 

In evaluating the results, we compare multiple metrics designed to capture three characteristics of the generated output: (i) semantic similarity (embedding-based metrics), (ii) textual similarity (overlap-based metrics), and (iii) model uncertainty in text generation 12 . We use BERTScore (Zhang et al., 2019) to evaluate semantic similarity, com-puting pairwise cosine similarity between candi-date and reference texts with contextual embed-dings. Specifically, we adopt the rescaled-with-baseline variant (BERTScore r), using a multilin-gual BERT model 13 to ensure comparability across languages. To evaluate textual similarity, we adopt: BLEU (Papineni et al., 2002), chrF++ (Popovi´ c, 2017), and three variants of ROUGE (Lin, 2004): ROUGE 1, which measures unigram (word-level) overlap, ROUGE 2, which measures bigram overlap and ROUGE L, which captures sentence-level struc-tural similarity by identifying the longest common subsequences. To quantify models uncertainty, we computed the average PPL interpreting lower PPL values as a proxy of the higher confidence of a model in text generation. 

> 12 Evaluations are performed using Hugging Face packages
> 13 https://huggingface.co/google-bert/ bert-base-multilingual-cased

To assess the statistical significance of each met-ric, we applied the Wilcoxon–Mann–Whitney test (Fagerland and Sandvik, 2009) on triple verbaliza-tion of the same model on different populations. We repeated the test ten times on random samples of 500 predictions and averaged the results. 

5 Results 

In this section, we present results comparing long-tail and head entities, as well as across languages (RQ1). We also examine the model uncertainty on verbalizing rare and well-known entities by compar-ing PPL scores on TailNLG and WebNLG (RQ2). 

5.1 [RQ1] Do LLMs perform differently in the verbalization of rare entities and does language impact the verbalization output? 

Table 2 reports the scores for triples containing long-tail and head entities, broken down by language (English, Italian and Spanish), for the bigger size models. Complete results are provided in Appendix I. In all cases, the embedding-based metric BERTScore r, scores higher on head triples. Conversely, results from chrF++, which correlates with morphological accuracy, and ROUGE are less consistent: in some cases they score higher on long-tail triples, while in others on head triples. In addition, for BERTScore r, statistically significant results consistently show higher scores for head entities than for long-tail entities. In contrast, overlap-based metrics display the opposite pattern: when results are statistically significant, triples containing long-tail entities achieve higher scores. This difference may be due to the addition of lexical items when verbalizing triples with head entities, which can make the generated output diverge from the gold standard (see Section 6). The average PPL provides clear insights, particularly for Qwen and Llama models. The results suggest that verbalizing triples with long-tail entities leads to higher PPL, suggesting that these entities present a substantially more challenging prediction task for the models. In contrast, the PPL scores for Gemma models are less clear and always lower for long-tail entities. Investigating whether language influences the generated output, we observe that across all settings performance is higher for English, indicating that English content is handled more effectively by the models. In addition, for Llama and Qwen, average PPL scores for Italian are consistently higher than those for Type Lang BERT r ↑ BLEU ↑ chrF ↑ R-1 ↑ R-2 ↑ R-L ↑ PPL ↓                                                                                                                              

> Llama-8B
> Long-tail en 0.61 0.25 60.39 0.66 0.43 0.56 93.36 es 0.58 0.17 53.30 0.58 0.35 0.49 222.16 it 0.46 0.13 47.73 *0.49 *0.29 *0.43 *88.06 Head en 0.65 *0.26 61.20 0.67 0.44 0.57 59.03 *
> es 0.60 0.19 53.23 0.58 0.36 0.48 94.52 *
> it 0.45 0.13 45.58 0.46 0.27 0.40 68.84 *
> Gemma-12B
> Long-tail en 0.63 0.26 61.65 0.67 0.44 0.58 330.02 *
> es 0.62 0.21 58.80 0.62 0.40 0.53 611.42 *
> it 0.61 0.24 *60.68 *0.64 *0.42 *0.55 *425.27 *
> Head en 0.66 *0.27 61.72 0.68 0.45 0.57 397.46 es 0.64 *0.22 57.51 0.61 0.39 0.51 926.65 it 0.61 0.20 56.97 0.59 0.38 0.50 1068.31
> Qwen-7B
> Long-tail en 0.65 0.29 62.47 0.69 0.46 0.58 134.13 es 0.60 0.16 53.42 0.57 0.34 0.49 181.75 it 0.44 0.11 46.82 0.47 0.26 0.41 100.26 Head en 0.69 *0.29 63.06 0.70 0.47 0.59 98.05 *
> es 0.61 0.16 51.83 0.55 0.32 0.46 102.36 *
> it 0.46 0.10 45.35 0.45 0.25 0.39 63.48 *

Table 2: Results on TailNLG long-tail vs head entitities verbalizations by data type and language. Metrics include BERTScore Rescaled (BERT r ), BLEU, chrF++ (chrF), ROUGE 1 (R-1) , ROUGE 2 (R2), ROUGE L (R-L) and Perplexity (PPL). Asterisks ( ∗) denote a statistically significant difference ( p < 0.05 ). 

English and Spanish, indicating that the models could be affected by language bias and that outputs in more widely represented languages tend to be more accurate. To better understand whether the presence of silver standard data influenced performance, we also split the results by gold vs. silver (Tables 9 and 10 in the Appendix). Overall, the scores tend to be higher for the silver standard, indicating, in line with (Panickssery et al., 2024), that the models are better aligned with machine-translated inputs. The comparison between Silver and Gold inputs also reveals interesting insights when results are further split into long-tail vs. head entities (Table 10): when the differences are statistically significant, scores for Silver data are higher for head entities, suggesting that machine translation and post-editing models may also exhibit a bias against less frequent entities. 

5.2 [RQ2] How does model performance differ when comparing the TailNLG benchmark with WebNLG? 

Table 3 reports the average performance of each model on the WebNLG test set and on long-tail triples from TailNLG. All statistically significant results indicate that embedding- and overlap-based metrics achieve higher scores on WebNLG than in                                                         

> Type BERT r↑BLEU ↑chrF ↑R-1 ↑R-2 ↑R-L ↑PPL ↓
> Llama-8B
> Long-tail 0.55 0.18 53.81 0.58 0.36 0.50 134.53 WebNLG 0.53 0.21 *53.77 0.65 *0.43 *0.53 *68.23 *
> Gemma-12B
> Long-tail 0.62 0.24 60.38 0.64 0.42 0.55 455.57 WebNLG 0.65 *0.30 *63.63 *0.73 *0.50 *0.59 *290.10 *
> Qwen-7B
> Long-tail 0.56 0.19 54.24 0.58 0.35 0.49 138.71 WebNLG 0.57 0.24 *56.49 0.66 *0.44 *0.54 *95.54 *

Table 3: Performance comparison of models between long-tail triples from TailNLG and WebNLG test set. Metrics: BERTScore Rescaled (BERT r ), BLEU, chrF++ (chrF), ROUGE-1 (R-1), ROUGE-2 (R-2), ROUGE-L (R-L), and Perplexity (PPL). Asterisks ( ∗) denote a statistically significant difference ( p < 0.05 ). 

the long-tail setting. This trend suggests that mod-els generate more accurate and lexically aligned verbalizations for well-known entities. Across all models, PPL is even lower for WebNLG verbalizations, with statistical signifi-cance, supporting the hypothesis that WebNLG entities and triples are more familiar to the models, potentially due to exposure during pre-training. In addition, since models tend to achieve higher scores when synthetic data are used as ground truth (Sarti and Nissim, 2024), our findings are further reinforced. Even when comparing model perfor-mance on the English WebNLG test set (entirely gold) with the long-tail portion of TailNLG (con-taining both gold and silver references), models still achieve higher scores on WebNLG. For further details, we refer the reader to Appendix I. 

6 Discussion 

Results show that, across all models, verbalization of triples that contains long-tail entities is more challenging (RQ1). This suggests that LLMs suf-fer from entity bias, with widely represented en-tities being processed more easily and producing more accurate outputs. The fact that in some cases overlap-based metrics are higher for data units con-taining long-tail entities suggest that the verbaliza-tion of head entities may contains more data and key content relative to the referenceFor example, the Italian verbalization of the data unit Karl Marx | spouse | Jenny von Westphalen; Karl Marx | country of citizenship | statelessness 

is “Karl Marx è stato apatico alla cittadinanza, pref-erendo lo status di apolidia. Karl Marx ebbe come consorte Jenny von Westphalen” (English trans-lation: Karl Marx was apathetic toward citizen-ship, preferring to remain stateless. Karl Marx’s spouse was Jenny von Westphalen), which results in a more verbose output that differs from the target sentence. The results concerning language strongly confirm the hypothesis that models also suffer from language bias, and that verbalizations in English are more accurate. These results may also be influ-enced by the fact that both Italian and Spanish have richer morphologies than English. For example, the Italian verbalization of the triples Amanda Ammann | country of citizenship | Switzerland; Amanda Ammann | occupation | model results in "Amanda Ammann è una cittadina svizzera e la-vora come modello" (English translation: Amanda Ammann is a Swiss citizen and works as a model), which exhibits a gender disagreement between the first part of the sentence (“cittadina svizzera”) and the final noun (“modello”). Generally Italian out-put tend to be less accurate and suffer from some additions and omissions. Another important finding emerging from the results is the high variability across evaluation met-rics. In particular, reference-based metrics are not always able to detect the presence of bias or pro-vide reliable scores, as becomes evident from the comparison with PPL, which yields more consis-tent results. In addition, the analysis suggests that different models may be affected by different types of bias; in particular, Gemma exhibits a higher PPL for triples containing long-tail entities. The use of PPL as proxy for uncertainty confirms our hypoth-esis that models perform better on a benchmark such as WebNLG compared to TailNLG (RQ2), as the models may have been exposed during pre-training to information related to the WebNLG benchmark or to the entities it contains. This find-ing is supported, with statistical significance, by both reference-based evaluation metrics and PPL. The results break down by Silver vs gold, also have practical implications for downstream appli-cations that rely on verbalization, showing that in pipelines where verbalized outputs are used as input to LLMs, silver-standard data may suf-fice, as models appear better aligned with machine-translated or automatically generated text. This suggests that silver data could provide usable out-puts while reducing the need for fully curated gold-standard annotations, although further research is needed to evaluate their impact on model perfor-mance and reliability. 

7 Conclusion and Future Works 

In this work, we investigated the performance of three state-of-the-art language models’ fami-lies in depth for verbalizing long-tail entities in a multilingual setting. To this end, we intro-duced TailNLG, the first benchmark composed of triple–verbalization pairs covering entities that range from rare to well-represented. Our results show that the leveraged models suffer from both language and entity biases, and that they perform better on a widely exploited benchmark such as WebNLG compared to TailNLG. Consistent with prior work, our findings highlight that current models struggle to handle long-tail entities, re-vealing limitations that make tasks involving less-represented entities more difficult and less reliable. As future work, we plan to enrich the TailNLG benchmark by adding more languages and data units. We also aim to refine the dataset by dis-tinguishing entity types not only based on their popularity (i.e., number of claims) but also by in-corporating culturally specific data units to investi-gate potential model biases. Additionally, we plan to create a gold standard that reflects diverse an-notator perspectives, enabling the study of human label variation in the verbalization task. Limitations 

We acknowledge that building a new high-quality benchmark is challenging, as it requires achieving an appropriate balance between human annotation and automatic processing steps. In this work, we consistently paired the automatic phase with hu-man assessment in an effort to ensure the high-est possible quality. Nevertheless, the presence of silver verbalizations in the benchmark consti-tutes a limitation, since machine translation tools, although reliable, may not fully align with human judgments. Second, by leveraging a well-known resource such as Wikidata, the variability of available claims is limited. As a result, models may already be familiar with many of the relations, which also recur across different data units. Finally, in defining long-tail entities, we adopted a simplified approach for experimental purposes, considering only a quantitative parameter (num-ber of claims). However, we are aware that entity underrepresentation is a multifaceted issue that in-volves multiple dimensions, both vertical (numeros-ity) and horizontal (cultural aspects). In future work, it would be valuable to consider additional perspectives and to define long-tail entities using a more comprehensive characterization. 

Ethical Considerations 

Our work relies on knowledge extracted from Wiki-data, whose community of contributors has recog-nized the underrepresentation of non-Western and woman contributors. This has an impact on how knowledge is shaped and which entities suffer un-derrepresentation. Adopting a purely statistical ap-proach to the definition of long-tail entities might have resulted in overlooking these cultural factors. Nevertheless, this approach was preferred to the adoption of theoretically grounded models of under-representation, as the latter could have introduced additional research bias in corpus creation. All annotations have been performed voluntar-ily by the members of our research group without relying on external annotation platforms. During the preparation of this work, the authors used AI tools in order to perform Grammar and spelling check. After using this tool, the authors reviewed and edited the content as needed and take full responsibility for the publication’s content. 

References 

Julia Adams, Hannah Brückner, and Cambria Naslund. 2019. Who counts as a notable sociologist on wikipedia? gender, race, and the “professor test”. 

Socius , 5:2378023118823946. Kancharla Aditya Hari, Bhavyajeet Singh, Anubhav Sharma, and Vasudeva Varma. 2023. WebNLG chal-lenge 2023: Domain adaptive machine translation for low-resource multilingual RDF-to-text generation (WebNLG 2023). In Proceedings of the Workshop on Multimodal, Multilingual Natural Language Genera-tion and Multilingual WebNLG Challenge (MM-NLG 2023) , pages 93–94, Prague, Czech Republic. Asso-ciation for Computational Linguistics. Su Lin Blodgett, Solon Barocas, Hal Daumé III, and Hanna Wallach. 2020. Language (technology) is power: A critical survey of “bias” in nlp. In Proceed-ings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics , pages 5454–5476. Marta Boscariol, Luana Bulla, Lia Draetta, Beatrice Fi-umanò, Emanuele Lenzi, and Leonardo Piano. 2024. Evaluation of llms on long-tail entity linking in his-torical documents (short paper). In EKAW (Compan-ion) .Thiago Castro Ferreira, Claire Gardent, Nikolai Ilinykh, Chris van der Lee, Simon Mille, Diego Moussallem, and Anastasia Shimorina, editors. 2020. Proceed-ings of the 3rd International Workshop on Natu-ral Language Generation from the Semantic Web (WebNLG+) . Association for Computational Linguis-tics, Dublin, Ireland (Virtual). Liam Cripwell, Anya Belz, Claire Gardent, Albert Gatt, Claudia Borg, Marthese Borg, John Judge, Michela Lorandi, Anna Nikiforovskaya, and William Soto Martinez. 2023. The 2023 webnlg shared task on low resource languages. overview and evaluation results (webnlg 2023). In Association for Computational Linguistics , page 55–66. Bayu Distiawan, Jianzhong Qi, Rui Zhang, and Wei Wang. 2018. Gtr-lstm: A triple encoder for sentence generation from rdf data. In Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 1627– 1637. Lia Draetta, Marco Antonio Stranisci, Flaviana Corallo, Pier Felice Balestrucci, Michael Oliverio, Rossana Damiano, and Alessandro Mazzei. 2025. Beyond the metrics: an investigation into the reliability of evaluation metrics for domain specific graph-based question answering. Daniel Duma and Ewan Klein. 2013. Generating nat-ural language from linked data: Unsupervised tem-plate extraction. In Proceedings of the 10th Inter-national Conference on Computational Semantics (IWCS 2013)–Long Papers , pages 83–94. ASSOC COMPUTATIONAL LINGUISTICS-ACL. Morten W Fagerland and Leiv Sandvik. 2009. The wilcoxon–mann–whitney test under scrutiny. Statis-tics in medicine , 28(10):1487–1497. Thiago Castro Ferreira, Diego Moussallem, Emiel Krah-mer, and Sander Wubben. 2018. Enriching the webnlg corpus. In Association for Computational Linguistics , page 171–176. Hanning Gao, Lingfei Wu, Po Hu, Zhihua Wei, Fan-gli Xu, and Bo Long. 2021. Rdf-to-text generation with reinforcement learning based graph-augmented structural neural encoders. CoRR .Claire Gardent, Anastasia Shimorina, Shashi Narayan, and Laura Perez-Beltrachini. 2017a. Creating train-ing corpora for nlg micro-planning. In 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-guistics, ACL 2017 , pages 179–188. Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL). Claire Gardent, Anastasia Shimorina, Shashi Narayan, and Laura Perez-Beltrachini. 2017b. The webnlg challenge: Generating text from rdf data. In 10th International Conference on Natural Language Gen-eration , pages 124–133. ACL Anthology. Arianna Graciotti, Leonardo Piano, Nicolas Lazzari, Enrico Daga, Rocco Tripodi, Valentina Presutti, and Livio Pompianu. 2025. Ke-mhisto: Towards a mul-tilingual historical knowledge extraction benchmark for addressing the long-tail problem. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2025 , pages 20316–20339. Nuno M. Guerreiro, Ricardo Rei, Daan van Stigt, Luisa Coheur, Pierre Colombo, and André F. T. Mar-tins. 2024. xCOMET: Transparent machine trans-lation evaluation through fine-grained error detection. 

Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics , 12:979–995. Aidan Hogan, Xin Luna Dong, Denny Vrandeˇ ci´ c, and Gerhard Weikum. 2025. Large language models, knowledge graphs and search engines: A cross-roads for answering users’ questions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.06699 .Fred Jelinek, Robert L Mercer, Lalit R Bahl, and James K Baker. 1977. Perplexity—a measure of the difficulty of speech recognition tasks. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America , 62(S1):S63–S63. Ming Jiang and Mansi Joshi. 2024. CPopQA: Ranking cultural concept popularity by LLMs. In Proceed-ings of the 2024 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-guistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 2: Short Papers) , pages 615–630, Mexico City, Mexico. Association for Computational Linguistics. Daniel Jurafsky and James H. Martin. 2025. Speech and Language Processing: An Introduction to Natu-ral Language Processing, Computational Linguistics, and Speech Recognition, with Language Models , 3rd edition. Online manuscript released August 24, 2025. Nikhil Kandpal, Haikang Deng, Adam Roberts, Eric Wallace, and Colin Raffel. 2023. Large language models struggle to learn long-tail knowledge. In 

Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 15696–15707. Rohan Kumar, Youngmin Kim, Sunitha Ravi, Haitian Sun, Christos Faloutsos, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Minji Yoon. 2024. Automatic question-answer gen-eration for long-tail knowledge. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.01382 .Huihan Li, Yuting Ning, Zeyi Liao, Siyuan Wang, Xi-ang Lorraine Li, Ximing Lu, Wenting Zhao, Faeze Brahman, Yejin Choi, and Xiang Ren. 2024. In search of the long-tail: Systematic generation of long-tail inferential knowledge via logical rule guided search. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing ,pages 2348–2370, Miami, Florida, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics. Chin-Yew Lin. 2004. Rouge: A package for automatic evaluation of summaries. In Text summarization branches out , pages 74–81. Arle Lommel, Aljoscha Burchardt, Maja Popovi´ c, Kim Harris, Eleftherios Avramidis, and Hans Uszkoreit. 2014. Using a new analytic measure for the anno-tation and analysis of MT errors on real data. In 

Proceedings of the 17th Annual Conference of the Eu-ropean Association for Machine Translation , pages 165–172, Dubrovnik, Croatia. European Association for Machine Translation. Alex Mallen, Akari Asai, Victor Zhong, Rajarshi Das, Daniel Khashabi, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. 2023. When not to trust language models: Investigating effectiveness of parametric and non-parametric mem-ories. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Vol-ume 1: Long Papers) , pages 9802–9822. Sebastien Montella, Betty Fabre, Tanguy Urvoy, Jo-hannes Heinecke, and Lina M Rojas Barahona. 2020. Denoising pre-training and data augmentation strate-gies for enhanced rdf verbalization with transformers. In Proceedings of the 3rd International Workshop on Natural Language Generation from the Semantic Web (WebNLG+) , pages 89–99. Michael Oliverio, Pier Felice Balestrucci, Alessandro Mazzei, and Valerio Basile. 2025. Webnlg-it: Con-struction of an aligned rdf-italian corpus through ma-chine translation techniques. In Findings of the As-sociation for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2025 ,pages 12073–12083. Michael Oliverio, Pier Felice Balestrucci, Alessandro Mazzei, Valerio Basile, and 1 others. 2024. Dipinfo-unito at the gem’24 data-to-text task: Augmenting llms with the split-generate-aggregate pipeline. In 

Proceedings of the 17th International Natural Lan-guage Generation Conference: Generation Chal-lenges , pages 59–65. Association for Computational Linguistics. Riccardo Orlando, Pere-Lluís Huguet Cabot, Edoardo Barba, and Roberto Navigli. 2024. Relik: Retrieve and link, fast and accurate entity linking and relation extraction on an academic budget. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics ACL 2024 ,pages 14114–14132. Arjun Panickssery, Samuel Bowman, and Shi Feng. 2024. Llm evaluators recognize and favor their own generations. Advances in Neural Information Pro-cessing Systems , 37:68772–68802. Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-Jing Zhu. 2002. Bleu: a method for automatic evalu-ation of machine translation. In Proceedings of the 40th annual meeting of the Association for Computa-tional Linguistics , pages 311–318. Laura Perez-Beltrachini, Rania Sayed, and Claire Gar-dent. 2016. Building RDF content for data-to-text generation. In Proceedings of COLING 2016, the 26th International Conference on Computational Lin-guistics: Technical Papers , pages 1493–1502, Osaka, Japan. The COLING 2016 Organizing Committee. Maja Popovi´ c. 2017. chrf++: words helping character n-grams. In Proceedings of the second conference on machine translation , pages 612–618. Virginia Ramón-Ferrer, Carlos Badenes-Olmedo, and Oscar Corcho. 2025. Spanish triple-to-text bench-mark on low-resource large language models. Gabriele Sarti and Malvina Nissim. 2024. IT5: Text-to-text pretraining for Italian language understanding and generation. In Proceedings of the 2024 Joint International Conference on Computational Linguis-tics, Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC-COLING 2024) , pages 9422–9433, Torino, Italia. ELRA and ICCL. Anastasia Shimorina, Elena Khasanova, and Claire Gar-dent. 2019. Creating a corpus for russian data-to-text generation using neural machine translation and post-editing. In Association for Computational Linguis-tics , pages 44–49. Marco Antonio Stranisci, Eleonora Bernasconi, Viviana Patti, Stefano Ferilli, Miguel Ceriani, and Rossana Damiano. 2023. The world literature knowledge graph. In International Semantic Web Conference ,pages 435–452. Springer. Kai Sun, Yifan Xu, Hanwen Zha, Yue Liu, and Xin Luna Dong. 2024. Head-to-tail: How knowledgeable are large language models (LLMs)? A.K.A. will LLMs replace knowledge graphs? In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Hu-man Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Pa-pers) , pages 311–325, Mexico City, Mexico. Associ-ation for Computational Linguistics. Marcos V Treviso, Nuno M Guerreiro, Sweta Agrawal, Ricardo Rei, José Pombal, Tania Vaz, Helena Wu, Beatriz Silva, Daan Van Stigt, and Andre Martins. 2024. xTower: A multilingual LLM for explaining and correcting translation errors. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2024 , pages 15222–15239, Miami, Florida, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics. Denny Vrandeˇ ci´ c and Markus Krötzsch. 2014. Wiki-data: a free collaborative knowledgebase. Communi-cations of the ACM , 57(10):78–85. Fan Zhang, Meishan Zhang, Shuang Liu, Yueheng Sun, and Nan Duan. 2023. Enhancing rdf verbalization with descriptive and relational knowledge. ACM Transactions on Asian and Low-Resource Language Information Processing , 22(6):1–18. Tianyi Zhang, Varsha Kishore, Felix Wu, Kilian Q Weinberger, and Yoav Artzi. 2019. Bertscore: Eval-uating text generation with bert. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.09675 .

A Entity Perplexity Analysis 

To compute PPL as a proxy for model uncertainty, we evaluated the six language models described in Section 4. This allows us to assess whether the PPL gap between head and long-tail entities is con-sistent across different model families. For each model, we tokenize the entity string directly using its specific tokenizer. PPL is calculated as the ex-ponentiated average negative log-likelihood of the sequence. We performed a statistical comparison between head and long-tail distributions using the two-sided Mann-Whitney U test. Results are re-ported in Table 2 using median and interquartile range (IQR, Q1–Q3) and are visualized on a log 10 

scale to improve readability. In all settings, PPL values for long-tail entities are higher with statisti-cal significance in most cases, thus validating our choice of using the Pareto cut-off for the selection of long-tail and top-head entities. 

B Triples configuration 

In line with other resources in the field of NLG, we extracted entities using different configurations. Some examples are shown in Figure 3.3 

C Verbalization guidelines 

The annotators were asked to verbalize the data-units following guidelines: 

C.1 Verbalization 

• Verbalize the triples as naturally as possible, aiming to create grammatically correct and fluent sentences. You may choose whether or not to follow the original order of the triples. Figure 3: Examples of Chain, sibling and mixed triples configuration 

Please indicate this in the “Order preserved” column by writing YES if the triple is verbal-ized in the same order, or NO if it is not. • You are free to break down the information conveyed by each set of triples in one or more sentences according to your preferences. • If a triple makes no sense (e.g., "Black Racer", "different from", "Black Racer"), you may choose not to verbalize it. In this case, write NA in the annotation column. • If a triple is very difficult or uncertain to in-terpret, you may propose a verbalization and leave comments in the Notes column. A col-league will review uncertain verbalizations later. • If you have the necessity to check the meaning or the translation of certain entities of claim you can use WikiData https: //www.wikidata.org/wiki/Wikidata: Main_Page .• Named entities 

– For named entities, if an equivalent ex-ists in Italian or Spanish, please use the correct translation in your verbalization. 

– If you have doubts about the translation of a claim, you can find the correspond-ing version in Spanish or Italian on Wiki-data. 

– If you cannot find an equivalent in Ital-ian or Spanish, do not translate it. In-stead, flag the triple as problematic in the “Notes” column. 

C.2 Validation 

In this phase, the annotators will cross-check and review colleagues’ annotations, evaluating whether each verbalization is acceptable by answering the following questions: • Does the text sound fluent and natural? • Does the text include all and only the informa-tion from the data? • Is the text written in good language (no spelling or grammatical mistakes)? 

D Data Unit distribution per Category 

Category Count 

Politician 47 Airport 46 Model 30 SportsTeam 37 Building 47 Company 44 Artist 41 City 47 MeanOfTransportation 20 Food 35 CelestialBody 17 Astronaut 33 Monument 47 ComicsCharacter 48 River 30 University 47 WrittenWork 26 Athlete 47 

Type Count 

Long-tail 408 Head 218 

Total entries 626 

> Table 4: Distribution of data entries across categories and entity types.

E Gold and Silver Entities Distribution F Translation 

F.1 Error correction 

You are provided with a Source, Trans-lation, Translation quality analysis, and Language Gold Silver Total               

> English 168 447 615
> Spanish 173 442 615
> Italian 384 231 615
> Total 725 1,120 1,845
> Table 5: Distribution of gold and silver verbalizations by language in TailNLG.

Translation quality score (weak, moder-ate, good, excellent). The Translation quality analysis contain a translation with marked error spans with different levels of severity (minor, major or critical). Additionally, we may provide a **reference translation**. Given this information, generate an explanation for each error and a fully correct translation. 

Italian source : Osvaldo il congilio è un personaggio dell’opera Lupo Alberto 

English translation : Osvaldo the congil is a character from the opera Wolf Albert. 

Translation quality analysis :Osvaldo the con<error sever-ity="minor">gil</error> is a char-acter from the opera<error sever-ity="minor">Wolf Albert</error>. 

Translation quality score : good The corresponding output is: Explanation for error: The term "con-gilio" is a typographical error and should be corrected to "coniglio," which means "rabbit" in Italian. The correct trans-lation of "Lupo Alberto" is "Wolfy Al-bert," as "Lupo" means "wolf" and "Al-berto" is a common name in Italian. The translation also misses the gender of "Os-valdo," which is masculine, and the cor-rect translation should reflect that. Ad-ditionally, the translation of "opera" as "opera" is correct, but the translation of "Wolf Albert" as "Wolf Albert" is incor-rect because it does not convey the cor-rect name of the work. The correct trans-lation should reflect the proper name of the work, which is "Lupo Alberto." 

F.2 Guidelines Human MT Evaluation 

Annotators were instructed to strictly follow the evaluation guidelines and, when necessary, to cor-rect the MT output by providing a correct or more accurate version. Annotate as 1 if the error is present and 0 if not, respecting the following taxonomy: 

Accuracy 

Issues related to whether the information content of the target is equivalent to the source. Subcate-gories: • Terminology: Issues related to the use of domain-specific terms. • Mistranslation: Issues related to the im-proper translation of content, including erro-neous translation of named entities. • Omission: Content present in the source is missing in the target. • Addition: Content not present in the source has been added to the target. • Untranslated: Text inappropriately appears in the source language. 

Fluency 

Issues related to the linguistic properties of the target without relation to its status as a translation. Subcategories: • Grammar: Issues related to grammatical properties of the text. • Style: The text shows stylistic problems. • Spelling: The text is spelled incorrectly. • Typography: Problems related to typographi-cal conventions. • Unintelligible: Text is garbled or otherwise unintelligible; indicates a major breakdown in fluency. 

Corrected Translation 

If the target translation is incorrect, you may pro-pose a new translation in the “Corrected translation” column. 

Guidelines for Annotators 

• Evaluate whether translating a Named En-tity (NE) makes sense in context, taking into account cultural and linguistic conventions; some NEs may be left untranslated. Source Target ρ r                  

> es en 0.23 0.25 en es 0.32* 0.27 it en 0.15 0.02 en it 0.56* 0.64 es it 0.26 0.22 it es 0.53* 0.49*
> Table 6: Spearman ( ρ) and Pearson ( r) correlation coef-ficients across language pairs. Source and Target denote the source language and the target language into which the source is translated, respectively. Asterisks (*) de-note a statistically significant difference (p < 0.05).

• Named entities should be considered correctly translated when it is common in the target language to refer to the entity in that way; otherwise, mark them as incorrect. Examples: 

– Crist Redemptor → Cristo Redentore →

Christ the Redeemer [Correct] 

– Lupo Alberto → Wolfy Albert [Incor-rect] 

– Louis the Springer → Luigi il Precursore [Incorrect] Wrong NEs must be annotated in the column “Mistranslation”. • Assess when it is appropriate to keep a term in English (or another source language). • Pay attention to the correct use of verb tenses. • Ensure agreement between singular and plu-ral. • The translation should be read naturally in the target language. • Ensure that the meaning is accurately pre-served. • Annotators should mark 1 for each subcate-gory when an issue occurs. If you label 1,specify why in the “note” column. 

F.3 Manual assessment of translation 

In the table below are reported the Spearman and Pearson correlation between the two annotators. 

G TailNLG Benchmark 

Each entry contains the following metadata labels: • Category : domain/class of the subject (e.g., Artist, City, Monument). • Eid : internal entry id (e.g., Id1 ). • Shape_type : data Units configuration (chain, sibling, mixed) that controls structural com-plexity. • Size : number of triples for Data Units. • Qid : Wikidata Id. • Type : Distinction between head and long-tail entities • Sub_type : Distinction between subtypes (e.g. head entities with rare claims). • triplesets : originaltripleset (as col-lected) and modifiedtripleset (normalized input). • lexicalizations : one or more lex elements with attributes quality (gold/silver) and 

lang (en/es/it). 

H Prompts 

English version In English, structured data is commonly represented as triples, with the format [subject, predicate, object]. Based on these triples, generate a single-paragraph text composed of com-plete, grammatically correct, and natural sentences. INSTRUCTIONS: - Generate the text solely from the input triples - Return the final verbalization with this format: The final verbalization is: [verbalization output] - Insert the verbalization of the input triples within square brackets [], without adding anything else. 

Spanish version En español, los datos estructura-dos se representan comúnmente como tríos, con el formato [sujeto, predicado, objeto]. Basándose en estos tríos, genere un texto de un solo párrafo com-puesto por oraciones completas, gramaticalmente correctas y naturales. INSTRUCCIONES: - Genere el texto únicamente a partir de las tripletas de entrada. - Devuelva la verbalización final con este formato: La verbalización final es: [salida de verbalización] - entre corchetes [] inserte la verbalización de las tripletas de entrada, sin añadir nada más 

Italian version In italiano, i dati strutturati sono comunemente rappresentati come triple, con il for-mato [soggetto, predicato, oggetto]. Sulla base di queste triple, genera un testo di un solo paragrafo composto da frasi complete, grammaticalmente cor-rette e naturali. INSTRUZIONI: - Genera il testo esclusivamente dalle triple in input - Restituisci la verbalizzazione finale con questo formato: La verbalizzazione finale è: [output di verbalizzazione] - tra le parentesi quadre [] inserisci la verbaliz-zazione delle triple in input, senza aggiungere altro. 

I Results Model Type BERT r BLEU ↑ chrF ↑ R-1 ↑ R-2 ↑ R-L ↑ PPL ↓

Qwen-3B Long-tail 0.50 0.13 50.10 0.53 0.30 0.45 182.87 Top-head 0.51 0.13 49.12 0.52 0.29 0.44 70.45 *

Qwen-7B Long-tail 0.56 0.19 54.27 0.58 0.35 0.49 138.70 Top-head 0.58 0.18 53.41 0.57 0.35 0.48 87.96 *

Gemma-4b Long-tail 0.53 0.17 54.32 0.57 0.35 0.48 4724.94 Top-head 0.56 0.17 53.48 0.56 0.34 0.46 3488.00 *

Gemma-12b Long-tail 0.62 0.24 60.38 0.64 0.42 0.55 455.57 *

Top-head 0.64 0.23 58.73 0.63 0.40 0.53 797.47 Llama-3B Long-tail 0.49 0.13 49.75 0.51 0.30 0.43 102.40 Top-head 0.50 0.14 48.19 0.49 0.29 0.42 72.55 *

Llama-8B Long-tail 0.55 0.18 53.81 0.58 0.36 0.50 134.53 Top-head 0.57 0.19 53.34 0.57 0.36 0.48 74.13 *

Table 7: Comparison of models by type. Asterisks ( ∗) denote a statistically significant difference with p < 0.05 .

Model Lang BERT r BLEU ↑ chrF ↑ R-1 ↑ R-2 ↑ R-L ↑ PPL ↓

Llama-3B en 0.58 * 0.21 * 56.67 * 0.63 * 0.40 * 0.53 * 73.51 *

es 0.46 0.11 46.40 0.47 0.26 0.39 114.99 it 0.44 0.08 44.26 0.42 0.22 0.35 81.98 Llama-8B en 0.63 * 0.25 * 60.72 * 0.66 * 0.43 * 0.56 * 79.37 *

es 0.59 0.18 53.27 0.58 0.35 0.49 170.14 it 0.45 0.13 46.85 0.48 0.28 0.42 80.23 Qwen-3B en 0.50 0.17 * 52.79 * 0.60 * 0.36 * 0.51 * 84.29 es 0.54 * 0.12 49.10 0.51 0.28 0.43 227.52 it 0.48 0.09 47.19 0.46 0.24 0.39 100.23 Qwen-7B en 0.67 * 0.29 * 62.71 * 0.69 * 0.46 * 0.59 * 119.43 es 0.60 0.16 52.78 0.56 0.33 0.48 149.16 it 0.45 0.11 46.25 0.46 0.26 0.40 85.39 *

Gemma-4b en 0.62 * 0.23 * 60.32 * 0.66 * 0.42 * 0.55 * 3798.99 es 0.51 0.14 50.76 0.53 0.31 0.44 6068.41 it 0.50 0.14 50.85 0.50 0.30 0.43 2794.93 *

Gemma-12b en 0.64 * 0.27 * 61.68 * 0.68 * 0.44 * 0.57 * 357.51 es 0.63 0.21 58.27 0.62 0.39 0.52 739.90 it 0.61 0.22 59.17 0.62 0.40 0.53 687.37 

Table 8: Average scores for different languages for each model (zero-shot). Asterisks ( ∗) denote a statistically significant difference with p < 0.05 .

Model Quality BERT r ↑ BLEU ↑ chrF ↑ R-1 ↑ R-2 ↑ R-L ↑ PPL ↓

Llama-3B gold 0.46 0.12 48.04 0.48 0.27 0.40 95.30 silver 0.52 * 0.14 49.80 0.52 * 0.30 * 0.44 * 86.86 *

Llama-8B gold 0.52 0.18 52.68 0.50 0.55 * 0.48 90.94 silver 0.58 * 0.19 54.22 0.59 * 0.36 0.50 * 122.10 *

Qwen-3B gold 0.50 0.13 50.62 0.53 0.30 0.44 94.12 silver 0.51 0.13 49.08 0.52 0.29 0.45 165.11 Qwen-7B gold 0.53 0.17 52.59 0.55 0.33 0.47 117.53 silver 0.60 * 0.20 54.75 0.59 * 0.36 0.50 118.35 Gemma-4b gold 0.52 0.17 53.67 0.55 0.34 0.46 1143.13 silver 0.55 * 0.18 54.18 0.57 0.35 0.48 6197.47 Gemma-12b gold 0.61 0.23 59.88 0.63 0.41 0.54 406.83 silver 0.64 * 0.24 59.59 0.64 0.41 0.54 715.74 

Table 9: Average scores for different quality levels (silver, gold) for each model (zero-shot). Asterisks ( ∗) denote a statistically significant difference with p < 0.05 .Type Quality BERT r BLEU ↑ chrF ↑ R-1 ↑ R-2 ↑ R-L ↑ PPL ↓

Llama-3B 

Long-tail Silver 0.50 * 0.14 49.63 0.52 0.30 0.44 89.70 *

Gold 0.47 0.13 49.95 0.50 0.29 0.42 122.69 Top-head Silver 0.53 * 0.16 * 50.04 * 0.52 * 0.31 * 0.44 * 82.59 Gold 0.46 0.11 45.40 0.45 0.25 0.38 57.57 

Llama-8B 

Long-tail Silver 0.56 0.18 53.64 0.58 0.35 0.50 149.01 Gold 0.52 0.19 54.07 0.57 0.36 0.49 111.15 *

Top-head Silver 0.60 * 0.21 * 55.08 * 0.60 * 0.38 * 0.50 * 81.60 Gold 0.52 0.16 50.76 0.53 0.32 0.45 63.08 

Gemma-4B 

Long-tail Silver 0.54 0.17 53.96 0.57 0.35 0.48 6781.26 Gold 0.52 0.18 54.91 0.56 0.35 0.48 1405.88 *

Top-head Silver 0.58 * 0.18 * 54.50 * 0.57 * 0.35 * 0.48 * 5319.16 Gold 0.53 0.16 51.96 0.53 0.32 0.44 781.08 

Gemma-12B 

Long-tail Silver 0.63 * 0.24 59.82 0.64 0.41 0.55 460.31 Gold 0.61 0.24 61.28 * 0.65 0.43 0.56 447.92 Top-head Silver 0.65 * 0.24 59.26 0.64 * 0.41 * 0.54 * 1100.04 Gold 0.61 0.21 57.95 0.61 0.39 0.51 350.20 

Qwen-3B 

Long-tail Silver 0.50 0.12 48.93 0.52 0.29 0.44 224.95 Gold 0.50 0.15 51.91 * 0.54 0.31 0.46 116.44 *

Top-head Silver 0.52 * 0.13 49.29 0.53 * 0.30 * 0.45 * 75.08 Gold 0.51 0.12 48.83 0.50 0.28 0.42 63.37 

Qwen-7B 

Long-tail Silver 0.59 * 0.19 54.66 0.59 0.36 0.50 129.26 *

Gold 0.52 0.18 53.57 0.56 0.35 0.49 153.98 Top-head Silver 0.62 * 0.20 * 54.89 * 0.59 * 0.36 * 0.50 * 101.93 Gold 0.54 0.16 51.23 0.53 0.32 0.45 67.31 

Table 10: Performance comparison of models broken down by entity type (long-tail / top-head) and annotation quality (silver / gold). Asterisks ( ∗) denote a statistically significant difference between silver and gold within the same type ( p < 0.05 , Mann-Whitney U test). Type Lang BERT r BLEU ↑ chrF ↑ R-1 ↑ R-2 ↑ R-L ↑ PPL ↓

Llama-3B 

Long-tail en 0.57 0.21 56.58 0.62 0.39 0.53 86.17 es 0.45 0.11 47.07 0.48 0.26 0.40 144.99 it 0.44 0.09 45.61 0.44 0.23 0.37 75.80 total 0.49 0.13 49.75 0.51 0.30 0.43 102.32 WebNLG en 0.56 0.23 57.17 0.71 * 0.47 * 0.56 53.67 *

es 0.49 * 0.16 * 49.20 0.58 * 0.35 * 0.45 * 68.28 *

it 0.48 * 0.13 * 47.75 * 0.53 * 0.30 * 0.42 * 41.18 *

total 0.51 0.17 * 51.37 0.60 0.37 0.48 * 54.38 *

Llama-8B 

Long-tail en 0.61 0.25 60.39 0.66 0.43 0.56 93.36 es 0.58 * 0.17 53.30 0.58 0.35 0.49 222.16 it 0.46 * 0.13 47.73 0.49 0.29 0.43 88.06 total 0.55 0.18 53.81 0.58 0.36 0.50 134.53 WebNLG en 0.61 0.30 65.53 0.74 * 0.51 * 0.59 * 42.56 *

es 0.55 0.19 * 52.43 0.66 * 0.43 * 0.53 * 90.42 *

it 0.43 0.15 * 45.35 0.54 * 0.34 * 0.46 * 71.73 *

total 0.53 0.21 * 53.77 0.65 * 0.43 * 0.53 * 68.23 *

Gemma-4B 

Long-tail en 0.60 0.23 59.85 0.66 0.42 0.55 4886.76 es 0.50 0.14 51.49 0.54 0.32 0.45 8074.87 it 0.49 0.15 51.62 0.51 0.31 0.44 1213.20 total 0.53 0.17 54.32 0.57 0.35 0.48 4724.94 WebNLG en 0.61 0.28 * 62.43 * 0.74 * 0.50 * 0.59 * 930.34 *

es 0.52 0.20 * 53.79 * 0.61 * 0.39 * 0.48 * 1493.20 *

it 0.49 0.18 * 53.72 0.57 * 0.36 * 0.46 601.97 *

total 0.54 0.22 * 56.65 * 0.64 * 0.42 * 0.51 1008.50 *

Gemma-12B 

Long-tail en 0.63 0.26 61.65 0.67 0.44 0.58 330.02 *

es 0.62 0.21 58.80 0.62 0.40 0.53 611.42 it 0.61 0.24 60.68 0.64 0.42 0.55 425.27 total 0.62 0.24 60.38 0.64 0.42 0.55 455.57 WebNLG en 0.66 * 0.33 * 65.97 0.77 * 0.53 * 0.62 * 333.93 es 0.65 0.30 * 62.68 0.71 * 0.49 * 0.57 * 210.04 *

it 0.64 * 0.28 * 62.24 * 0.70 * 0.47 * 0.57 326.33 *

total 0.65 * 0.30 * 63.63 0.73 * 0.50 * 0.59 * 290.10 *

Qwen-3B 

Long-tail en 0.49 0.17 52.66 0.59 0.35 0.51 100.79 es 0.53 0.12 49.47 0.52 0.29 0.44 325.03 it 0.48 0.10 48.08 0.48 0.25 0.41 124.49 total 0.50 0.13 50.07 0.53 0.30 0.45 183.44 WebNLG en 0.55 * 0.24 * 57.05 0.72 * 0.47 * 0.57 * 51.40 *

es 0.56 * 0.17 * 51.54 0.63 * 0.38 * 0.49 * 150.84 *

it 0.55 * 0.15 * 51.75 0.59 * 0.34 * 0.47 * 55.81 *

total 0.55 * 0.19 * 53.44 0.64 * 0.40 * 0.51 * 86.02 *

Qwen-7B 

Long-tail en 0.65 * 0.29 62.47 0.69 0.46 0.58 134.13 es 0.60 0.16 53.43 0.57 0.34 0.49 181.75 it 0.44 0.11 46.82 0.47 0.26 0.41 100.26 total 0.56 0.19 54.24 0.58 0.35 0.49 138.71 WebNLG en 0.68 0.34 * 66.33 0.79 * 0.55 * 0.64 * 46.52 *

es 0.60 0.24 56.19 0.66 * 0.43 * 0.53 * 117.41 *

it 0.44 0.15 46.96 0.54 * 0.33 * 0.45 * 122.70 *

total 0.57 0.24 56.49 0.66 * 0.44 * 0.54 * 95.54 *

Table 11: Performance comparison of models on long-tail triples from TailNLG and WebNLG test set. Asterisks ( ∗)denote a statistically significant difference with p < 0.05 .