Title: A Human-in/on-the-Loop Framework for Accessible Text Generation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.18879v1

Published Time: Fri, 20 Mar 2026 01:37:47 GMT

Number of Pages: 12

Markdown Content:
# A Human-in/on-the-Loop Framework for Accessible Text Generation 

## Lourdes Moreno, Paloma Martínez 

Universidad Carlos III de Madrid Av. Universidad, 30, Leganés, 28911, Spain lourdes.moreno@uc3m.es, paloma.martinez@uc3m.es 

Abstract 

Plain Language and Easy-to-Read formats in text simplification are essential for cognitive accessibility. Yet current automatic simplification and evaluation pipelines remain largely automated, metric-driven, and fail to reflect user comprehension or normative standards. This paper introduces a hybrid framework that explicitly integrates human participation into LLM-based accessible text generation. Human-in-the-Loop (HiTL) contributions guide adjustments during generation, while Human-on-the-Loop (HoTL) supervision ensures systematic post-generation review. Empirical evidence from user studies and annotated resources is operationalized into (i) checklists aligned with standards, (ii) Event-Condition-Action trigger rules for activating expert oversight, and (iii) accessibility Key Performance Indicators (KPIs). The framework shows how human-centered mechanisms can be encoded for evaluation and reused to provide structured feedback that improves model adaptation. By embedding the human role in both generation and supervision, it establishes a traceable, reproducible, and auditable process for creating and evaluating accessible texts. In doing so, it integrates explainability and ethical accountability as core design principles, contributing to more transparent and inclusive NLP systems. 

Keywords: text accessibility, simplification, human-in-the-loop validation, LLM-based generation 

## 1. Introduction 

Access to understandable information is a funda-mental right, particularly in critical domains such as health, education, legal, and public administra-tion. Many people face barriers when interacting with complex or technical texts, including people with low literacy, reading comprehension difficul-ties, cognitive impairments, older adults, and non-native speakers (OECD, 2024). To address these challenges, two accessibility-oriented content for-mats have gained prominence: Plain Language (PL), codified in ISO 24495-1:2023 (ISO, 2023), and Easy-to-Read (ER), defined by standards such as the Spanish standard UNE 153101:2018 (UNE, 2018) and international guidelines (IFLA, 2010; In-clusion Europe, 2025). Recent advances in Natural Language Process-ing (NLP), particularly with Large Language Models (LLMs), have enabled automatic text simplification at lexical, syntactic, and discourse levels (Vaswani et al., 2017; Nisioi et al., 2017; Shardlow et al., 2024). Nevertheless, evaluating and ensuring the accessibility of such outputs remains a major chal-lenge. Widely used metrics such as BLEU (Pap-ineni et al., 2002), SARI (Xu et al., 2016), SAMSA (Sulem et al., 2018), or BERTScore (Zhang et al., 2019) capture partial aspects of quality-lexical sim-plicity, structural fidelity, and semantic similarity-but fail to reflect user comprehension (Alva-Manchego et al., 2021). Parallel to advances in NLP, the Human-Computer Interaction (HCI) community has empha-sized participatory and empirical validation meth-ods for accessibility (Lazar et al., 2017). Research described in (Moreno et al., 2024; Alarcon et al., 2024, 2023) combines NLP resources with user-centered evaluations providing both methodological insights and empirical evidence on how cognitive accessibility can be implemented in practice. However, most current approaches rely either on automatic metrics or ad hoc human validation, rarely integrating both into a systematic workflow. In the field of NLP and human-AI interaction, this in-tegration has been conceptualized through Human-in-the-Loop (HiTL) and Human-on-the-Loop (HoTL) approaches. HiTL involves human input during the training or generation process, e.g., selecting or editing candidate simplifications, or guiding the model in fine-tuning (Amershi et al., 2014; Zanzotto, 2019). HoTL, by contrast, emphasizes post-hoc su-pervision, where humans oversee system outputs through structured review, guidelines, or monitoring mechanisms (Shneiderman, 2020). While HiTL has been applied to tasks such as interactive summa-rization or controllable text generation, and HoTL to safety monitoring in AI systems, these paradigms have not yet been fully exploited for cognitive ac-cessibility in text simplification. To fill the gap between automatic simplification and actual cognitive accessibility, we propose a framework that makes human participation a core design principle. HiTL enables interactive guid-ance during generation, such as accepting or re-jecting lexical substitutions, while HoTL supervision provides structured oversight through checklists, trigger rules, and accessibility key performance indicators (KPIs) after outputs are produced. To-gether, these mechanisms ensure that accessible text generation is not only driven by metrics but also 

> arXiv:2603.18879v1 [cs.CL] 19 Mar 2026

grounded in human judgments, standards, and em-pirical validation. At a glance, the framework combines: (i) HiTL guidance during generation, (ii) automatic metric-based checks, (iii) Event–Condition–Action (ECA) triggers for escalation, (iv) HoTL expert review, and (v) adaptation through structured feedback. The remainder of this paper is organized as fol-lows: Section 2 reviews related work on language accessibility standards, Section 3 reviews previ-ous work on text simplification evaluation and HCI methods, and Section 4 presents background re-sources and empirical evidence. Section 5 intro-duces the proposed HiTL/HoTL framework (work-flow, checklist, triggers, KPIs, integration). Sec-tion 6 discusses ethical and governance issues, and Section 7 concludes with a discussion and future work. 

## 2. Plain Language (PL) and Easy-to-Read (ER) Standards 

For NLP tools to be effective and socially relevant, they must be aligned with PL and ER standards, which promote the adaptation of texts to the real needs of their users, especially those with intellec-tual disabilities (ID) or reading limitations. The main international reference is ISO 24495-1:2023, which defines general principles applicable to any language and domain, establishing that texts must be easy to find, understand, use, and evaluate by their target audience (ISO, 2023). At the European level, the European Strategy on the Rights of People with Disabilities 2021–2030 highlights the importance of access to understand-able information for persons with disabilities, rec-ognizing ER as a key tool for achieving cognitive accessibility. Similarly, Directive (EU) 2016/2102 requires public sector websites and mobile applica-tions to be accessible in accordance with standards such as the European standard EN 301 549 (ETSI, 2021) and the WCAG web content standard (W3C, 2025), which includes requirements on textual com-prehensibility. In Spain, the UNE 153101 EX:2018 standard on Lectura Fácil (LF) stands out, establishing guide-lines for the drafting, layout, and validation of texts, emphasizing the participation of people with ID in the evaluation process(UNE, 2018). There are other national standards and legal frameworks that also shape PL/ER practice. Examples include ÖNORM V2100:2017 in Austria (administrative texts in LF), DIN SPEC 33429 in Germany (PL criteria for public documents), and the Equality Act (2010) in the United Kingdom, which requires pub-lic and private organizations to ensure accessibility, including clear information for people with cognitive disabilities. In addition, the UK General Data Pro-tection Regulation (UK GDPR) and the Data Pro-tection Act (2018) require privacy-related informa-tion to be clear and understandable. In healthcare, the NHS England Accessible Information Standard (AIS) requires accessible formats such as ER for people with cognitive or sensory disabilities. The Plain English Campaign certifies texts with the Crys-tal Mark, a symbol of linguistic clarity, while the GOV.UK Style Guide mandates the use of clear language on government digital platforms (PLAIN, 2021). Although PL and ER share the overall goal of making text understandable, there are important differences. PL is aimed at a broad audience and seeks to reduce unnecessary technical terms and complex expressions. It typically relies on brevity, inclusive everyday language, and a structure that allows key information to be easily located, using direct style, active voice, and short paragraphs. ER is specifically designed for people with reading comprehension difficulties, such as people with ID, and therefore requires stricter guidelines for simplification and content presentation: bulleted lists, high-frequency words, abundant use of visual examples, and single-idea sentences. In addition, verification with real readers with ID is essential to validate ER texts (IFLA, 2010; Inclusion Europe, 2025; UNE, 2018). The core principles shared by PL and ER include avoiding information overload, using familiar exam-ples and metaphors, maintaining consistency in terminology, and reinforcing content with visual ele-ments that facilitate comprehension. These guide-lines constitute a valuable source of best practices that NLP developers can implement in automatic text simplification systems: controlling sentence length, adapting style to the target audience, and validating outputs with real users to ensure that simplifications effectively improve comprehension, usability, and cognitive accessibility. 

## 3. Related Work 

Research on text simplification and accessibility has evolved along three main lines: automatic eval-uation metrics, HCI methods for cognitive acces-sibility, and human participation in NLP workflows. These strands converge in the challenge of ensur-ing that automatically simplified outputs are not only linguistically well-formed, but also cognitively accessible and aligned with normative standards. Early work on automatic metrics focused on surface-level overlap with reference corpora, such as BLEU (Papineni et al., 2002) and ROUGE (Lin, 2004). While useful in machine translation, these metrics have drawbacks as they penalize valid reformulations and ignore structural or semantic changes (Xu et al., 2016; Sulem et al., 2018). Ded-icated metrics such as SARI (Xu et al., 2016) and DSARI (Maddela et al., 2021) improved lexical cov-erage by rewarding additions, deletions, and re-tentions, but still fail to capture global readability and meaning preservation. Structural metrics like SAMSA (Sulem et al., 2018) focus on sentence split-ting and discourse structure, while semantic simi-larity methods such as BERTScore (Zhang et al., 2019) and MoverScore (Zhao et al., 2019) leverage embeddings to better capture meaning preserva-tion. More recently, LENS (Maddela et al., 2022) has demonstrated a higher correlation with human judgments by learning evaluation from annotated data. However, systematic reviews conclude that no single metric fully captures the multifaceted re-quirements of accessibility (Alva-Manchego et al., 2021). In parallel, the HCI community has developed methods to assess and design for cognitive acces-sibility. Standards (ISO, 2023; W3C WAI, 2021, 2023; ETSI, 2021) emphasize clarity, structure, and validation with end users. Empirical studies show that accessible interfaces can enhance com-prehension when supported with contextual glos-saries, pictograms, and multimodal cues. Alarcon et al. (2024); Moreno et al. (2024) developed an approach that combined corpus-based resources with participatory evaluations, validating glossary-based user interfaces with users with diverse cog-nitive profiles and developing annotated corpora for lexical simplification, (Alarcon et al., 2023). This line of work illustrates how user-centered design and linguistic resources can be integrated into ac-cessibility evaluation. Works including user evalua-tions of simplification approaches (Ledoyen et al., 2025) proposed an evaluation framework in which human assessments supplement automatic met-rics. Goldsack et al. (2023) evaluated a system that generates summaries of biomedical articles for lay readers, focusing on readability and factual-ity; the evaluation was conducted by NLP experts through questionnaires, leaving lay users aside. Other approaches simulate human behavior using multi-agent systems, such as ExpertEase (Mo and Hu, 2024), where multiple agents cooperate on text simplification tasks using external tools and guidelines, but no human evaluation is performed. Finally, recent work has explored human partici-pation in NLP architectures. HiTL approaches are widely used in annotation and training pipelines, allowing humans to refine data, correct model out-puts, or steer generation in real time (Chiang and Lee, 2023). Gao et al. (2025) describe an evalua-tion of an LLM-based simplification system aligned using Direct Preference Optimization (DPO), using human feedback from people with ID (15 partici-pants) and expert evaluators. The final evaluation indicated the effectiveness of DPO for personal-izing LLM-based simplification, but also points to challenges such as improved HCI methods for elic-iting preferences. More recently, İlgen and Hat-tab (2025) defined a human-centered readability score based on a five-dimensional framework (tone, trust, cultural relevance, feasibility, and clarity), in-tegrating automatic metrics with human experience around readability. HoTL approaches emphasize structured supervi-sion and post-hoc control, in which humans moni-tor, validate, or adjust system outputs through re-view procedures, guidelines, or oversight mecha-nisms (Li et al., 2020; Shneiderman, 2020; Carrer et al., 2024). In the context of text simplification, these paradigms remain underexplored, although related work in summarization and factual consis-tency shows the potential of combining automatic scoring with human oversight (Manakul et al., 2023). This convergence reinforces the shift toward hybrid workflows that systematically integrate human vali-dation within NLP evaluation pipelines. Recent work has also addressed the trustworthi-ness and safety of text simplification. Hayakawa et al. (2025) proposed an efficient framework for lexical simplification with small LLMs, emphasiz-ing privacy, efficiency, and the detection of harmful simplifications through probabilistic safety signals. Their approach highlights the need for traceable and accountable simplification pipelines. In summary, existing metrics, HCI methods, and human-in/on-the-loop frameworks each addressing parts of the problem but rarely intersecting. What is missing is a unified approach that reuses lan-guage resources, incorporates HCI evidence, and defines hybrid workflows where humans comple-ment automation in the generation, evaluation, and adjustment of PL and ER outputs. This gap moti-vates the approach proposed in this paper. 

## 4. Background Resources 

Evidence is drawn from user studies and corpora developed in previous research on cognitive acces-sibility. Data from older adults, people with intellec-tual disabilities (ID), and expert annotators are used in tasks such as complex word identification (CWI), synonym acceptance, corpus annotation, and User Interface (UI) validation. Only selected findings are summarized here, providing preliminary evi-dence to motivate a hybrid HiTL-HoTL framework and serving as the basis for accessibility KPIs, re-view triggers, and human intervention points. 

4.1. Complex Word Identification Task 

Alarcon et al. (2024) did an evaluation for CWI task where 50 participants (25 older adults and 25 with ID) were asked to highlight words considered diffi-cult in domain-specific texts. In this study, partici-pants directly marked the words they perceived as difficult, and system behavior was analyzed through standard CWI metrics as user-grounded evidence of perceived lexical difficulty. Results indicated systematic differences be-tween groups. Older adults tended to select a larger number of candidates, which led to higher recall (0.73) but lower precision (0.54). By contrast, par-ticipants with ID marked fewer items, resulting in higher precision (0.58) and a lower F1 score (0.56). Within each group, educational background also influenced performance: older adults with higher education showed a better balance between recall and precision, whereas participants with lower lit-eracy showed greater variability in their selections. These complementary profiles suggest that while older adults provide broader coverage, participants with ID contribute more selective judgments. This divergence motivates adaptive HiTL mechanisms that can balance broader lexical coverage against more selective judgments across user profiles. 

4.2. Synonym Acceptance Task 

Alarcon et al. (2024) carried out an experiment with the same 50 participants (25 older adults and 25 with ID), who were asked to judge the adequacy of proposed synonyms to complex words in the con-text. Results indicate profile-dependent differences across groups (Table 1). Older adults tended to reject all candidates more frequently (16.6%) than participants with ID (7.6%). In contrast, participants with ID showed a stronger tendency to accept at least one synonym (67.5% vs 58.9%), while full ac-ceptance was very similar across groups (24.5% vs 24.9%). These patterns suggest that participants with ID may be more flexible in their judgments, whereas older adults are more conservative. Beyond group-level differences, educational background also influences synonym acceptance. Participants with lower education levels (primary or no studies) achieved higher rates of correct ac-ceptance ( ≈ 78 –80% ), while those with higher edu-cation were more likely to partially accept or reject candidates (e.g., ≈ 65% correct with secondary education). This effect was statistically significant, confirming that literacy levels shape how simplifi-cations are perceived and judged. Taken together, these results indicate that syn-onym acceptance is not homogeneous across user profiles, and that both group characteristics (older vs. ID) and individual factors (such as education level) must be considered when defining accep-tance thresholds. For HiTL workflows, this evi-dence motivates adaptive mechanisms sensitive to user profile; for HoTL supervision, it suggests the need to monitor systematic rejection patterns as triggers for expert review.          

> Group None Some All
> Older adults 16.6% 58.9% 24.5% Participants with ID 7.6% 67.5% 24.9%

Table 1: Synonym acceptance rates by participant group ( n = 50 ). None/Some/All = none accepted / some accepted / all accepted. 

4.3. Expert Annotation Reliability 

Concerning resources, EASIER corpus, (Alarcon et al., 2023), was annotated by three expert lin-guists and is composed of 260 documents with 8,155 words labelled as complex words and 5,130 words with at least one proposed context-aware synonym associated. This corpus provides evi-dence about the reliability of lexical complexity judg-ments. Agreement was higher for multi-word ex-pressions ( κ = 0 .64 ) than for single words ( κ =0.52 ), suggesting that multi-words may be more stable units for supervised training and for HoTL supervision. These results provide complementary evidence to user studies and support the integra-tion of supervised resources into hybrid evaluation workflows. 

4.4. HCI-based Validation Methods 

In addition to corpus annotation, (Moreno et al., 2024) describes a system where glossaries of definitions, synonyms, and pictograms are inte-grated into cognitively accessible user interfaces, which were validated with end users, including older adults and people with ID. Validation relied on HCI-based methods applied directly with participants (Lazar et al., 2017), such as: (i) comprehension questionnaires measuring retention of key infor-mation; (ii) navigation tasks evaluating time and success rates to locate content in documents; (iii) glossary activation logs recording actual use of con-textual support; and (iv) usability feedback collected through standardized instruments. These methods provided empirical evidence of how accessibility is perceived and implemented by real users, beyond what automatic metrics can analyze. 

4.5. Resources for Language Model Adaptation 

Beyond user studies and user interface validation, evidence also comes from resources applied in sim-plification system development in evaluation cam-paigns. Participation in a shared task on text sim-plification (Moreno et al., 2025) demonstrated that widely used automatic simplification metrics (e.g., BLEU, SARI, FKGL) fail to capture comprehension and accessibility principles, requiring complemen-tary human feedback for calibration. In parallel, (Martínez et al., 2024) emphasized the need to align evaluation with international standards such as ISO 24495-1 and with empirical user evidence. These works highlight two key points. First, re-sources such as annotated corpora, synonym judg-ments, and comprehension tests are not only valu-able for benchmarking but can also inform prompt design and fine-tuning of LLMs. For instance, sim-plification rules derived from corpus annotation can be encoded as constraints in prompting strategies. Second, iterative metrics-based evaluation cycles followed by human review and adjustment consti-tute an implicit HiTL-HoTL workflow, showing how human participation can guide and supervise LLM adaptation. These resources also anticipate integration into adaptive training pipelines in the future. Prefer-ence signals such as synonym acceptance thresh-olds, comprehension test scores, and glossary ac-tivation logs can be repurposed not only to eval-uate outputs but also to supervise iterative fine-tuning cycles. This perspective directly links em-pirical evidence with emerging preference-based approaches to LLM alignment. In this sense, accessibility-grounded corpora provide domain-specific signals that can complement large-scale, generic datasets in both prompting strategies and preference-based adaptation. 

4.6. Implications for HiTL–HoTL Workflows 

Taken together, these results illustrate how human participation most effectively complements automa-tion. Older adults provide coverage in CWI, people with ID contribute precision, expert annotation stabi-lizes supervision via multi-word units, and validated interface patterns ensure delivery through acces-sible modalities. Moreover, resources for model adaptation (Martínez et al., 2024) and evidence of metric limitations (Alva-Manchego et al., 2021; Moreno et al., 2025) indicate that human input must not only validate but also guide training and prompt-ing strategies. This convergence of corpus-based evidence, user studies, and model adaptation resources sets the stage for a hybrid framework. Section 5 imple-ments these insights by defining a Human-in/on-the-Loop (HiTL–HoTL) workflow structured around checklists, trigger rules, and KPIs. 

## 5. Proposed Framework 

We propose a hybrid framework that integrates Human-in-the-Loop (HiTL) and Human-on-the-Loop (HoTL) mechanisms across accessible text generation, metric-based evaluation, and adapta-tion of PL/ER outputs. Grounded in the evidence summarized in Section 4 (CWI, synonym accep-tance, expert annotation, UI validation, and model adaptation), the framework operationalizes this ev-idence through checklists, ECA trigger rules, and profile-specific KPIs that govern the workflow de-picted in Figure 1. The contribution is therefore an operational and traceable framework that con-solidates prior empirical evidence, annotated re-sources, and accessibility-oriented supervision into a unified workflow. 

5.1. Overall Workflow 

At a high level (Figure 1), the workflow is a multi-stage, iterative pipeline. Evidence and resources (A) condition generation with HiTL (B) through in-puts and constraints; the output plus interaction logs are then automatically evaluated (C). From (C), metrics feed rule-based checking (D) and quality indicators (E) that determine routing: if rule condi-tions are met, the ECA rule engine activates HoTL supervision (F); if quality trends or thresholds sug-gest systematic issues, signals are sent to Adap-tation and Learning (G). Expert editing operations from (F) are consolidated in (G) and returned to (B) as updates to prompts/policies or the model, clos-ing the loop; once an approved decision is issued in (F), the result is delivered via an accessible User Interface (H). Evidence from Section 4 indicates that differ-ences in CWI between older adults and people with ID inform HiTL checkpoints; profile-specific synonym-acceptance patterns motivate HoTL es-calation; higher agreement in multi-word annota-tions defines stable units for supervision; and user-validated resources can be embedded into prompts and fine-tuned models for adaptation. The following sections provide the technical de-tails: Section 5.2 on HiTL adjustments, Section 5.3 on the HoTL checklist, Section 5.4 on rule-based routing, Section 5.5 on quality indicators, and Sec-tion 5.6 on how these signals are leveraged for adaptation. 

5.2. Human-in-the-Loop (HiTL) Adjustments 

HiTL participation is enacted during generation (Figure 1, B). Evidence from Section 4 indicates broader coverage (higher recall) for older adults and higher precision for participants with ID; these complementary profiles are implemented through interactive steps that (i) request short, active sentences, (ii) discourage jargon and expand acronyms, (iii) split long sentences, and (iv) fix meaning distortions while preserving facts and numeric integrity. User-validated resources (Sec-tion 4), annotation guidelines, synonym judgments, and glossary constraints are encoded directly into USER -TESTED EVIDENCE                 

> ●Complex word
> identification,
> synonym acceptance,
> …
> ●Annotated corpora &
> glossary rules
> ●Cognitive
> accessibility
> checklists (EASIER,
> guidelines)
> ●Standards (ISO
> 24495 -1, UNE
> 153101, WCAG)
> GENERATION & HiTL (LLM -based)
> Prompted LLM + Constraints
> Logs with user interactions (accepted synonyms, edits, …)
> AUTOMATIC METRIC -BASED EVALUATION
> Readability -Factuality -Semantic Similarity -Structural features
> ECA RULE ENGINE
> Triggers for HoTL
> KPI TRACKER
> Composite Quality Index (CQI) +
> profile -specific KPIs
> HoTL SUPERVISION (Expert Review)
> Checklist review
> Approve · Regenerate · Revise
> ADAPTATION & LEARNING
> ACCESSIBLE UI (Final Output)
> PL/ER final text -Pictograms –
> Glossary tooltips
> inputs &
> constraints
> output + interaction logs
> metrics to KPIs
> approved
> B
> C
> DE
> FG
> A
> H
> metrics to rules
> R1 –Ri triggered trends /
> thresholds
> edits to
> preferences
> Update prompts/policies
> RLHF/DPO
> fine -tuning (LLM )
> auto -approve(CQI ≥ threshold) GOVERNANCE
> • HoTL sampling: 5 –10% of outputs
> • Mandatory HoTL: after new model/policy
> • No auto -approve for high -risk domains
> update
> prompts/model
> regenerate
> request

Figure 1: Overall workflow of the proposed HiTL–HoTL framework. prompts or, when needed, into fine-tuning proce-dures. Interaction traces, produced at generation time, feed automatic evaluation (Figure 1, B →C), while stabilized guidance (e.g., glossary rules) is later consolidated in adaptation and learning and pushed back to generation (Figure 1, G →B). 

5.3. Human-on-the-Loop (HoTL) Checklist 

While HiTL constrains and guides generation un-der uncertainty, HoTL provides accountable human adjudication when borderline, risky, or conflicting cases cannot be resolved with sufficient confidence through automatic checks. HoTL supervision provides a structured review layer when automatic metrics do not guaran-tee comprehension. The checklist integrates in-ternational standards (ISO, 2023; UNE, 2018) with evidence from synonym acceptance, expert-annotation reliability, interface validation, and model-adaptation studies (Section 4). Table 2 summarizes how accessibility dimen-sions map to concrete checklist items with human-centered validation (e.g., comprehension tests, reading times, usability questionnaires), including a row on prompt/model adaptation where user-validated resources (corpus rules, glossary con-straints, synonym judgments) can be encoded into prompt design or fine-tuning. Outputs are considered checklist-compliant when at least two-thirds of the dimensions are satis-fied. In the workflow, expert review is reached when rule checks route an item to HoTL (Figure 1, D →F); edits inform adaptation for subsequent cycles (Fig-ure 1, F →G), regeneration can be requested where appropriate (Figure 1, F →B), and delivery follows an approved decision (Figure 1, F →H). 

5.4. Trigger Rules for Review 

Systematic synonym-rejection patterns (Section 4) and divergences between readability and compre-hension (Section 4) motivate ECA rules that de-termine when HoTL supervision is required. Fol-lowing automatic evaluation (Figure 1, C), metric outputs feed the rule engine; when trigger condi-tions are met, cases are escalated to expert review (Figure 1, D →F). Listing 1 provides illustrative ex-amples of accessibility-related risks that may trig-ger escalation, with thresholds that can be made profile-specific. Listing 1: ECA rules for accessibility-driven triggers (conditions reference metric thresholds). 

RULE R1 // fluency over meaning IF Readability_FH > 80 AND BERTScore < 0.85 THEN Activate HoTL supervision RULE R2 // excessive deletion of essentials IF SARI_deletions > 0.40 AND AlignScore < 0.80 THEN Activate HoTL supervision RULE R3 // structural clarity compromised IF DSARI < theta_DSARI OR SAMSA < theta_SAMSA THEN Activate HoTL supervision 

Thresholds (e.g., 80 for readability, 0.85 for BERTScore) are calibrated per profile and domain, and can be revised as evidence is gathered. Addi-Dimension Operational check Human-centered validation 

Lexical clarity Common words; explain acronyms Comprehension tests Syntactic simplicity ≤20 words per sentence; one idea per sentence Eye-tracking; reading times Structural clarity Logical order; headings; lists Task success rates Relevance Preserve essentials; avoid redundancy User judgments Multimodal support Glossaries; pictograms Usability questionnaires; user test-ing Prompt/model adap-tation Encode rules, glossary constraints, and domain speci-ficity HiTL prompt design; fine-tuning 

Table 2: HoTL checklist integrating accessibility dimensions with human-centered validation. tional rules may include violations of terminology/-glossary constraints or missing mandatory sections, ensuring that escalation to HoTL remains sensitive to accessibility-critical failures. 

5.5. Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) 

KPIs are defined to connect evaluation with the user evidence in Section 4. Examples include comprehension gains from user tests, synonym-acceptance rates stratified by profile, glossary-activation rates in the UI, the recall–precision balance in CWI, and improvements in model-adaptation accuracy. To implement these indicators, ECA rules are specified in Listing 2. Listing 2 summarizes the KPI layer used for routing and monitoring. In ad-dition, a Composite Quality Index (CQI) integrates Readability (0.4), Semantic Fidelity (0.3), and Struc-tural Clarity (0.3), with weights summing to 1 and intended as an initial operational weighting for rout-ing decisions. In the workflow (Figure 1), KPIs populate (E) and support monitoring, thresholding, and adaptation decisions together with rule checks. Listing 2: Accessibility-oriented KPIs and compos-ite quality index.                                            

> KPI_1: IF comprehension_test_score(user) >= baseline +delta THEN record comprehension_gain KPI_2: IF synonym_acceptance_rate(profile) >= theta_profile THEN validate lexical_clarity KPI_3: IF glossary_activation_rate >= tau THEN confirm multimodal_support_used KPI_4: IF recall_precision_balance(CWI) within [alpha, beta] THEN accept CWI_performance KPI_5: IF model_adaptation_accuracy >= previous_cycle +epsilon THEN record adaptation_improvement Composite_Quality_Index (CQI): CQI =0.4*Readability +0.3*Semantic_Fidelity +0.3*Structural_Clarity Decision threshold: CQI >= gamma (calibrated to comprehension outcomes)

5.6. Integration of Evidence 

Beyond evaluation, the proposed KPIs and trig-gers can be implemented as structured preference signals for adaptation. While approaches such as Reinforcement Learning from Human Feed-back (RLHF) (Stiennon et al., 2020), Direct Pref-erence Optimization (DPO) (Rafailov et al., 2023), and other preference-based fine-tuning strategies (Ziegler et al., 2019; Böhm et al., 2019), including multi-agent feedback frameworks for adaptive sim-plification (Mo and Hu, 2024), do not strictly require domain-specific signals, accessibility-grounded KPIs provide a practical basis to ensure that adap-tation is aligned with PL and ER principles rather than generic preferences. In this view, synonym-acceptance judgments, comprehension outcomes, and UI usability/usage signals extend beyond mea-surement and drive iterative improvement (Figure 1, F→G→B). To make this actionable, what to measure (KPIs) and what to do (triggers) are encoded in a unified ECA policy that governs routing and adaptation; Listing 3 abstracts both into a unified ECA policy. Listing 3: Unified ECA formalization of KPIs and triggers.                              

> #KPI definition: measurable function of metrics and/or user signals KPI_i =f(metrics, user_signals) #Trigger: ECA rule referencing one or more KPIs TRIGGER_j: IF KPI_i <theta_i OR combine(KPI_m, KPI_n) <threshold THEN Activate HoTL supervision

5.7. Illustrative Framework Execution 

To illustrate how the framework operates in prac-tice, Table 3 presents a compact lexical simplifi-cation case derived from the user-study materials discussed in Section 4. The example shows how a potentially difficult term may motivate simplification, while still requiring escalation when a candidate substitutes risks changing the register or reducing domain adequacy. This case illustrates a typical accessibility-sensitive situation for the proposed framework. The Stage Excerpt / signal Framework interpretation                       

> Original excerpt “La caza y la pesca en la Comunidad de Madrid están sujetas a regulación especial y requieren una serie de
> trámites , entre ellos la obtención de licencia . . . ” / “Hunt-ing and fishing in the Community of Madrid are subject to special regulation and require a series of administrative procedures , including obtaining a licence . . . ”
> The source text contains a potentially difficult domain-specific term in an adminis-trative context. Initial adapted out-put “. . . requieren una serie de papeleos . . . ” / “. . . require a series of paperwork . . . ”
> The output simplifies the term, but may introduce an overly colloquial register and reduce administrative precision. Detected is-sue/trigger Readability may improve at the lexical level, but adequacy risk remains for domain register and terminology. / Possi-ble mismatch between lexical simplicity and administrative appropriateness.
> Trigger rule routes the case to HoTL review because lexical simplification alone does not guarantee appropriate word-ing. HoTL-guided revi-sion Review the candidate substitute against the checklist di-mensions for terminology, clarity, and domain adequacy. /Check whether the simplified term remains precise, un-derstandable, and appropriate for the target context.
> Checklist dimensions affected: lexical clarity, ter-minology consistency, and appropriateness of register. Approved output “. . . requieren varios trámites administrativos , entre ellos obtener una licencia . . . ” / “. . . require several administra-tive procedures , including obtaining a license . . . ”
> Meaning-preserving simplifi-cation approved; the wording is clearer while maintaining administrative precision.

Table 3: Illustrative execution of the proposed framework on a lexical simplification case. Spanish excerpts are followed by an English gloss in italics. original term ( trámites ) may motivate lexical simpli-fication for some readers, but not every candidate substitute is equally appropriate. A form such as 

papeleos may appear simpler, yet it introduces a more colloquial register and weakens the adminis-trative precision and pragmatic appropriateness of the original wording in this document type. In such cases, automatic simplification may improve local readability while still requiring HoTL review to verify domain adequacy, terminology consistency, prag-matic fit, and appropriateness for the intended user profile. The revised version therefore preserves accessible wording without sacrificing the intended administrative meaning. 

5.8. Multi-agent Workflow Development 

As a practical implementation pathway, the frame-work could be developed as a multi-agent workflow, with specialized components for evidence retrieval, generation, evaluation, rule checking, KPI tracking, and human review. In this view, an orchestrator coordinates the interaction between generation, au-tomatic assessment, escalation rules, and HoTL supervision, while preserving the traceability of in-termediate decisions. Each agent performs a dis-tinct role within the human-in/on-the-loop workflow, supporting traceability, explainability, and adaptive control. Taken together, these agents form a trace-able and adaptive workflow in which automation and human supervision jointly support accessible, explainable, and accountable text generation. This architecture-specific realization is secondary to the present contribution, which remains the framework itself. 

## 6. Ethical Considerations and Governance 

The framework is designed for accountability. Every decision point is traceable via versioned prompts and policies, rule evaluations, KPI snap-shots, and HiTL/HoTL logs, enabling post-hoc au-dit and model-update provenance. Explainability is supported by explicit ECA rules (why a route was chosen), checklist rationales (why edits were made), and profile-specific thresholds (why an item was approved or escalated). To protect users, logs follow data minimization and role-based access controls. Governance safeguards ensure human oversight across the loop: HoTL sampling (5–10% of outputs) applies even under auto-approve; it is mandatory af-ter new model or policy releases; and auto-approve is disabled for high-risk domains (e.g., dosages in drug treatments appearing in a discharge sum-mary report, legal warnings in contracts). These controls and profile-specific thresholds uphold over-sight while enabling continuous, evidence-based adaptation. This governance setup is consistent with the Ethics Guidelines for Trustworthy AI (European Commission, 2019), emphasizing human agency and oversight (HiTL/HoTL), transparency and ex-plainability (machine-actionable rules with inter-pretable rationales), privacy and data governance (controlled retention and access), and fairness and accessibility (PL/ER principles). In addition, the proposed framework explicitly supports traceability and explainability as transversal safeguards: ev-ery generation, evaluation, and supervision step is logged and versioned, enabling end-to-end trace-ability from input prompts and human interventions to final outputs and model updates. Likewise, ex-plainability is ensured by the declarative ECA rules and checklist rationales that make the decision path verifiable and intelligible both for experts and regu-lators. Together, these mechanisms reinforce ac-countability and foster confidence in the deploy-ment of adaptive, human-supervised NLP systems for cognitive accessibility. 

## 7. Conclusions 

This paper proposes a hybrid framework that inte-grates Human-in-the-Loop (HiTL) and Human-on-the-Loop (HoTL) mechanisms to support cognitive accessibility in Plain Language and Easy-to-Read text generation. Grounded in empirical evidence from the EASIER project, expert annotation, and user interface validation, the framework translates accessibility principles into operational components such as checklists, trigger rules, and Key Perfor-mance Indicators (KPIs). These resources system-atically complement automatic metrics with user-grounded evidence and expert supervision. The framework builds on prior evidence suggest-ing complementary strengths across user groups, broader coverage from older adults and higher pre-cision from people with intellectual disabilities, as well as the stabilizing role of expert annotations and the added value of interface validation for real-world deployment. Moreover, integrating accessibility-based corpora and evaluation signals illustrates how human feedback can guide prompt design, fine-tuning, and preference-based alignment strate-gies. By linking accessibility KPIs and triggers with adaptation methods such as RLHF and DPO, the framework connects evaluation and training into a traceable, explainable, and reproducible workflow. These mechanisms strengthen accountability and transparency, ensuring that accessibility standards are embedded not only in model outputs but also in the generation and supervision processes. Future work will extend validation across do-mains, explore quantitative measures of compre-hension gain, and develop the multi-agent orches-tration framework, expanding the roles of evidence, evaluation, and reviewer agents to automate moni-toring, explainability, and adaptive retraining. This direction aims to contribute to the standardization of accessibility-aware evaluation pipelines and to the creation of inclusive, transparent, and trustworthy NLP systems. 

## 8. Acknowledgements 

This work has been supported by grant PID2023-1485770B-C21 (Human-Centered AI: User-Driven Adapted Language Models–HUMAN_AI) by MICI-U/AEI/ 10.13039/501100011033 and by FED-ER/UE. 

## 9. Bibliographical References 

Rodrigo Alarcon, Lourdes Moreno, and Paloma Martínez. 2023. Easier corpus: A lexical simplifi-cation resource for people with cognitive impair-ments. PLOS ONE , 18(4):e0283622. Rodrigo Alarcon, Lourdes Moreno, Paloma Martínez, and José A. Macías. 2024. Easier sys-tem. evaluating a spanish lexical simplification proposal with people with cognitive impairments. 

International Journal of Human–Computer Inter-action , 40(5):1195–1209. Fernando Alva-Manchego, Carolina Scarton, and Lucia Specia. 2021. The (un)suitability of auto-matic evaluation metrics for text simplification. 

Computational Linguistics , 47(4):861–889. Saleema Amershi, Maya Cakmak, W. Bradley Knox, and Todd Kulesza. 2014. Power to the people: The role of humans in interactive machine learn-ing. AI Magazine , 35(4):105–120. Florian Böhm, Yang Gao, Christian M. Meyer, Ori Shapira, Ido Dagan, and Iryna Gurevych. 2019. Better rewards yield better summaries: Learning to summarise without references. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.01214. Luisa Carrer, Tatiana Anikina, Mounica Maddela, Fernando Alva-Manchego, and Carolina Scar-ton. 2024. Towards holistic human evaluation of automatic text simplification. In Proceedings of the 1st Workshop on Human Evaluation of NLP Systems (HumEval) , pages 66–79. Cheng-Han Chiang and Hung-yi Lee. 2023. Can large language models be an alterna-tive to human evaluations? arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.01937. ETSI. 2021. En 301 549: Accessibility re-quirements for ict products and services. 

https://www.etsi.org/deliver/etsi_ en/301500_301599/301549 .European Commission. 2019. Ethics guidelines for trustworthy ai. https://digital-strategy. ec.europa.eu/en/library/ ethics-guidelines-trustworthy-ai .Y. Gao, K. Johnson, D. Froehlich, L. Carrer, and S. Ebling. 2025. Evaluating the effectiveness of direct preference optimization for personaliz-ing german automatic text simplifications for per-sons with intellectual disabilities. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.01479. T. Goldsack, Z. Zhang, C. Tang, C. Scarton, and C. Lin. 2023. Enhancing biomedical lay summari-sation with external knowledge graphs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.15702. A. Hayakawa, S. Bott, and H. Saggion. 2025. To-wards trustworthy lexical simplification: Explor-ing safety and efficiency with small llms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.25086. HULAT Group. 2026. Artefacts for lrec 2026: A human-in/on-the-loop framework for accessible text generation. Zenodo record. IFLA. 2010. Directives for easy-to-read materials. 

https://www.ifla.org/publications/ directory-of-easy-to-read-publications/ .B. İlgen and G. Hattab. 2025. Toward human-centered readability evaluation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.10801. Inclusion Europe. 2025. European standards and guidelines for easy-to-read information. 

https://www.inclusion-europe.eu/ easy-to-read-standards-guidelines/ .ISO. 2023. Iso 24495-1:2023 plain language—part 1: Governing principles and guidelines. https: //www.iso.org/standard/78907.html .Jonathan Lazar, Jinjuan Heidi Feng, and Harry Hochheiser. 2017. Research Methods in Human-Computer Interaction . Morgan Kaufmann. F. Ledoyen, G. Dias, A. Lechervy, J. Pantin, F. Maurel, Y. Chahir, E. Gouzonnat, M. Berthelot, S. Moravac, A. Altinier, et al. 2025. Inclusive easy-to-read generation for individuals with cognitive impairments. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.00691. Nianyu Li, Adebola Adeyiga, and Rami Bahsoon. 2020. Explanations for human-on-the-loop: A probabilistic model checking approach. In Pro-ceedings of the IEEE/ACM 15th International Symposium on Software Engineering for Adap-tive and Self-Managing Systems , pages 181– 187. Chin-Yew Lin. 2004. Rouge: A package for auto-matic evaluation of summaries. In Text Summa-rization Branches Out , pages 74–81. M. Maddela, Y. Dou, D. Heineman, and W. Xu. 2022. Lens: A learnable evaluation metric for text simplification. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.09739. Mounica Maddela, Fernando Alva-Manchego, and Wei Xu. 2021. Controllable text simplification with explicit paraphrasing. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Hu-man Language Technologies , pages 3536–3553, Online. Association for Computational Linguis-tics. Potsawee Manakul, Adian Liusie, and Mark Gales. 2023. SelfCheckGPT: Zero-resource black-box hallucination detection for generative large lan-guage models. In Proceedings of the 2023 Con-ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-guage Processing , pages 9004–9017, Singa-pore. Association for Computational Linguistics. Paloma Martínez, Alberto Ramos, and Lourdes Moreno. 2024. Exploring large language models to generate easy to read content. Frontiers in Computer Science , 6:1394705. K. Mo and R. Hu. 2024. Expertease: A multi-agent framework for grade-specific document simpli-fication with large language models. Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2024 , pages 9080–9099. Lourdes Moreno, Helen Petrie, Paloma Martínez, and Rodrigo Alarcon. 2024. Designing user inter-faces for content simplification aimed at people with cognitive impairments. Universal Access in the Information Society , 23:99–117. Lourdes Moreno, Jesus M. Sanchez-Gomez, Marco Antonio Sanchez-Escudero, and Paloma Martínez. 2025. Hulat-uc3m @ clears2025 sub-task 1: Prompt-based simplification for plain lan-guage using spanish language models. In Pro-ceedings of the Iberian Languages Evaluation Forum (IberLEF 2025) , volume 4098 of CEUR Workshop Proceedings . CEUR-WS.org, ISSN 1613-0073. Sergiu Nisioi, Sanja Štajner, Simone Paolo Ponzetto, and Liviu P. Dinu. 2017. Exploring neural text simplification models. In Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Papers) , pages 85–91. OECD. 2024. Skills Outlook 2024: Skills for Inclu-sive Transitions . OECD Publishing. Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-Jing Zhu. 2002. BLEU: a method for au-tomatic evaluation of machine translation. In 

Proceedings of the 40th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics , pages 311–318. PLAIN. 2021. Plainlanguage.gov. https://www. plainlanguage.gov .Rafael Rafailov, Archit Sharma, Eric Mitchell, Christopher D. Manning, Stefano Ermon, and Chelsea Finn. 2023. Direct preference optimiza-tion: Your language model is secretly a reward model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.18290. Matthew Shardlow, Fernando Alva-Manchego, Riza Theresa Batista-Navarro, Stefan Bott, et al. 2024. An extensible massively multilingual lexical simplification pipeline dataset using the multils framework. In Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Tools and Resources for People with REAd-ing DIfficulties (READI) @ LREC-COLING 2024 ,pages 38–46. Ben Shneiderman. 2020. Human-centered artificial intelligence: Reliable, safe & trustworthy. Interna-tional Journal of Human–Computer Interaction ,36(6):495–504. Nisan Stiennon, Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Daniel M. Ziegler, Ryan Lowe, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford, Dario Amodei, and Paul Christiano. 2020. Learning to summarize with human feed-back. In Advances in Neural Information Pro-cessing Systems , volume 33, pages 3008–3021. Elior Sulem, Omri Abend, and Ari Rappoport. 2018. Semantic structural evaluation for text simplifica-tion. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.05022. UNE. 2018. Une 153101:2018 ex. lectura fácil. pautas y recomendaciones para la elaboración de documentos. https: //www.une.org/encuentra-tu-norma/ busca-tu-norma/norma?c=N0060036 .Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N. Gomez, Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. At-tention is all you need. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 30. W3C. 2025. Wcag 2 overview. https://www.w3. org/WAI/standards-guidelines/wcag/ .W3C WAI. 2021. Making content usable for peo-ple with cognitive and learning disabilities (coga). 

https://www.w3.org/TR/coga-usable/ .W3C WAI. 2023. Web content accessibility guide-lines (wcag) 2.2. https://www.w3.org/TR/ WCAG22/ .Wei Xu, Courtney Napoles, Ellie Pavlick, Quanze Chen, and Chris Callison-Burch. 2016. Optimiz-ing statistical machine translation for text sim-plification. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics , 4:401–415. Fabio Massimo Zanzotto. 2019. Human-in-the-loop artificial intelligence. Journal of Artificial Intelli-gence Research , 64:243–252. Tianyi Zhang, Varsha Kishore, Felix Wu, Kilian Q. Weinberger, and Yoav Artzi. 2019. BERTScore: Evaluating text generation with BERT. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.09675. W. Zhao, M. Peyrard, F. Liu, Y. Gao, C. M. Meyer, and S. Eger. 2019. Moverscore: Text gen-eration evaluating with contextualized embed-dings and earth mover distance. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.02622. Daniel M. Ziegler, Nisan Stiennon, Jeffrey Wu, Tom B. Brown, Alec Radford, Dario Amodei, Paul Christiano, and Geoffrey Irving. 2019. Fine-tuning language models from human prefer-ences. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.08593. 

## 10. Language Resource References 

A first set of reusable artefacts associated with the framework (checklist schema, ECA trigger tem-plates, KPI definitions) is available through Zenodo (HULAT Group, 2026). 

## A. An Illustrative Lexical Simplification Example 

This appendix provides the full passage underlying the illustrative example discussed in Table 3. The example is included to clarify how automatic checks, escalation rules, and HoTL review interact in the proposed workflow. It is not presented as a new evaluation result, but as a compact demonstration of framework execution on a lexical simplification case derived from the materials used in the user studies described in Section 4. 

A.1. Original passage 

“La caza y la pesca en la Comunidad de Madrid están sujetas a regulación especial y requieren una serie de trámites , entre ellos la obtención de licen-cia, para poder practicarlas.” / “Hunting and fishing in the Community of Madrid are subject to special regulation and require a series of administrative procedures , including obtaining a licence, in order to be practiced.” 

A.2. Initial adapted version 

“La caza y la pesca en la Comunidad de Madrid tienen normas especiales y requieren una serie de 

papeleos para poder practicarlas.” / “Hunting and fishing in the Community of Madrid have special rules and require a series of paperwork in order to be practiced.” 

A.3. Illustrative revision after HoTL review 

“La caza y la pesca en la Comunidad de Madrid tienen normas especiales y requieren varios 

trámites administrativos , entre ellos obtener una licencia, para poder practicarlas.” / “Hunting and fishing in the Community of Madrid have special rules and require several administrative proce-dures , including obtaining a licence, in order to be practiced.”