Title: 2605.08416v1.pdf

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.08416v1

Published Time: Tue, 12 May 2026 00:14:19 GMT

Number of Pages: 53

Markdown Content:
1

Alignment as Jurisprudence 

Nicholas A. Caputo *

Abstract 

Jurisprudence, the study of how judges should properly decide cases, and alignment, the science 

of getting AI models to conform to human values, share a fundamental structure. These seemingly 

distant fields both seek to predict and shape how decisions by powerful actors, in one case judges 

and in the other increasingly powerful artificial intelligences, will be made in the unknown future. 

And they use similar tools of the specification and interpretation of language to try to accomplish 

those goal s. Thus, rather than thinking of AI models only as aids to judges or focusing on how AI 

affects specific doctrinal areas like copyright or free speech , as the bulk of post -ChatGPT legal 

scholarship has done, it is more fruitful to think of models as closely analogous to judges who are 

tak ing on an increasing variety of essential adjudicatory and decisionmaking roles in society. The 

great debates of jurisprudence, about what the law is and what it should be, can provide insight 

into alignment, and lessons from what does and does not work in alignment can help make progress 

in jurisprudence. 

This essay puts the two fields directly into conversation, illuminating the fundamental similarities 

between law and AI and pointing to ways in which each field can improve the other. Drawing on 

leading accounts of jurisprudence, particularly Dworkin’s principle -oriented interpretivism and 

Sunstein’s positivist ac count of law as analogical reasoning, and on cutting -edge alignment 

approaches, namely Constitutional AI and case -based reasoning, it illustrates the value of a more 

sophisticated legally -inspired approach to the interplay of rules and cases in finetuning alignment 

and points to ways that AI can provide a better understanding of how the law works and how it 

can be improved by t he introduction of AI . AI systems and the law should operate to empower 

people to act in the world, helping to expand their capabilities and the extent to which they ar e

able to achieve their goals. As AI continues to improve in capacity , and as the constraints that legal 

theory places on human judges seem be coming undone , the conversation between these two fields 

will become increasingly essential and may help point to a better version of both.         

> *Researcher –Legal Alignment on Frontier AI at the Oxford Martin AI Governance Initiative. I am grateful to
> Mackenzie Arnold, Molly Brady, Noah Feldman, Ioannis Kalpouzos, Lawrence Lessig, Martha Minow, Cass
> Sunstein, Justin Walker, Zachary Wojtowicz, and Jonathan Zittrain for their insights, comments, and help.
> Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4800894

2

## Table of Contents 

ABSTRACT ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ..................... 1

INTRODUCTION ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .............. 2

I. THE TECHNICAL TOOLS OF ALIGNMENT TO HUMAN PREFERENCES ................................ .............. 12 

A. REINFORCEMENT LEARNING FROM HUMAN FEEDBACK (RLHF) ................................ ........ 13 

B. CONSTITUTIONAL AI ................................ ................................ ................................ ................ 15 

C. CASE -BASED REASONING ................................ ................................ ................................ .......... 20 

II. JURISPRUDENTIAL THEORIES OF INTERPRETATION AND SPECIFICATION ................................ ..... 22 

A. INTERPRETIVISM AND THE VALUE OF VALUES ................................ ................................ ......... 25 

B. ANALOGIES AND INCOMPLETELY THEORIZED AGREEMENTS ................................ ................ 27 

III. ALIGNMENT AS JURISPRUDENCE ................................ ................................ ................................ ... 32 

A. INTERPRETIVISM AND CONSTITUTIONAL AI ................................ ................................ ........... 35 

B. GROUNDING CASE -BASED ALIGNMENT ................................ ................................ .................. 41 

IV. JURISPRUDENCE AS ALIGNMENT ................................ ................................ ................................ .... 45 

A. AI AS SUPPLEMENT TO EXISTING LAW ................................ ................................ .................... 46 

B. AI AS COMPLEMENT BEYOND EXISTING LAW ................................ ................................ ........ 49 

CONCLUSION ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ................ 52 

Introduction 

Take a highly simplified picture of adjudication: A judge is confronted with a new case, 

perhaps a slip and fall negligence claim or a suit for breach of contract. She determines what the 

relevant legal issues are and then searches for answers. She starts with rules announced in statutes 

or constitutions and then looks to precedents, 1 seeking to understand the patterns that underly and 

structure them . Each case provi des an example of the application of law to some set of facts that 

can be abstracted and aggregated to form a general mode of interpretation for the issue to which  

> 1

Much is wrapped up in this concept apparently familiar to any lawyer, but for the purposes of this paper I will use a 

simple, old definition, that a precedent “is a previous instance or case which is or may be taken as an example or 

rule for subsequent ca ses, or by which some similar act or circumstance may be supported or justified.” Arthur L. 

Goodhart, Precedent in English and Continental Law , 50 L. Q. REV . 40, 41 (1934) (quoting the Oxford English 

Dictionary). It is instructive to note that Goodhart’s definition includes both examples and rules as ways in which 

precedents can function in subsequent reasoning. In the typical practice of law, we might think o f this distinction as 

one between the holding of a case, which provides its rule to be applied in later cases, and its facts, which provide an 

example of the application of the rule that can be used to guide its application in later cases. However, as I wi ll argue 

below, this distinction turns out not to be such a simple one to draw. See also H.L.A. HART , THE CONCEPT OF LAW 

131 –32 (3d, 1986) (arguing that precedent operates to illustrate general rules and providing a set of contrasting facts 

that define precedent). For some useful troubling of the simple picture of precedent that I will initially rely on here, 

see Jan G. Deu tsch, Precedent and Adjudication , 83 YALE L.J. 1553, 1584 (1973); Frederick Schauer, Precedent , 39 

STAN . L. REV . 571 (1987). This paper focuses on the role of precedent in common law jurisdictions, where it is 

relatively binding on later courts, and does not consider implications of the role of precedent in civil law 

jurisdictions, though concepts from those context s like jurisprudence constante might prove interesting to explore in 

the context of alignment. See Robert L. Henry, Jurisprudence Constante and Stare Decisis Contrasted , 15 A.B.A. J. 

11, 11 –12 (1929) (arguing that jurisprudence constante , a doctrine under which something like stare decisis can 

emerge in civil law jurisdictions but only after a long series of similar decisions by courts, might be a better form of 

precedent than stare decisis itself). 

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4800894 3

they relate. 2 The full meaning of the underlying rule is more clearly specified through this process 

of contextual application to a diverse set of cases as ambiguities are confronted and ironed out .

The judge extrapolates these patterns to resolve the case now before her, applying and crystalizing 

them into a holding. Past patterns constrain as much as they permit, as precedent binds a judge 

from departing too far from how prior cases have been decided. 3 But what if multiple 

extrapolations, multiple possible rules, are equally supported by precedent? 4 If so, the 

decisionmaker chooses the best candidate by reference to considerations like justice, equity, policy, 

or principle. 5 As Professor H.L.A. Hart argues, where existing rules and precedents are not 

dispositive, courts must “strik[e] a balance, in light of the circumstances, between competing 

interests” to decide the case. 6 Values play a greater role where the new case is importantly different 

from precedent, and the inclusiveness and flexibility of adjudication allow judges and the system 

as a whole to respond to novel situations. Once decided, the judge gives her reasons, which provide 

information for future decisionmakers using her case as new precedent. 

This picture of judging, one that sits at the heart of American law, is also a picture of 

artificial intelligence (AI) and its alignment to human values. The two fields share the same 

structure. In law, the guiding hand of the past is called precedent ; in AI, training data. A foundation 

model 7 like OpenAI’s GPT -4 or Anthropic’s Claude is pretrained 8 on a mass of data and discovers  

> 2

See Edward H. Levi, An Introduction to Legal Reasoning , 15 U. CHI . L. REV . 501, 501 –502 (1948).  

> 3

Precedent takes its special character in reasoning from its ability to bind subsequent decisionmakers; indeed, the 

core of “[t]he concept of a system of precedent is that it constrains judges in some cases to follow decisions they do 

not agree with.” Patr ick S. Atiyah , Form and Substance in Legal Reasoning: The Case of Contract , in THE LEGAL 

MIND : ESSAYS FOR TONY HONORÉ 19, 27 (Neil MacCormick & Peter Birks eds., 1986). This rule of stare decisis 

operates both vertically across the hierarchy of courts and horizontally within a court’s own past decisions, Amy 

Coney Barrett, Precedent and Jurisprudential Disagreement , 91 TEX . L. REV . 1711, 1712 –13 (2013), though, as 

recent cases have shown, its binding character is not absolute. Compare Dobbs v. Jackson Women’s Health 

Organization, 597 U.S. __, 68 (2022) (slip op.) (writing that stare decisis makes “adherence to precedent” a “norm 

but not an inexorable command”) with Dobbs v. Jackson Women’s Health Organization, 597 U.S. __, 30 (2022) 

(Breyer, Sotomayor, & Kagan, JJ., dissenting) (slip op.) (arguing that the majority “abandons stare decisis, a 

principle central to the rule of law).  

> 4

See, e.g. , Professor Ronald Dworkin’s example of multiple plausible resolutions of the McLaughlin case surviving 

the test of precedent. RONALD DWORKIN , LAW ’S EMPIRE 245 (1986).  

> 5

The extent to which these external considerations, or other ones considered less suitable grounds for judicial 

decisions, influence or overwhelm reasoning from precedent is hotly debated and difficult to determine, but it is at 

least generally agreed that they do play a role even in a system with strong reliance on stare decisis . See Christopher 

J. Peters, Foolish Consistency: On Equality, Integrity, and Justice in Stare Decisis, 105 YALE L.J. 2031, 2037 –38 

(1996) (analyzing whether stare decisis can be justified philosophically).  

> 6

Hart, supra note 1 at 132.  

> 7

A foundation model is a kind of AI that is capable of performing a variety of tasks rather than being specialized to 

perform one specific task, which many models are. For example, GPT -4 is a foundation model because it is capable 

of things ranging from ha ving a conversation to analyzing an image to writing code, whereas something like a model 

that can only predict a potential loan applicant’s risk of default is an example of “narrow AI.” Elliot Jones, 

Explainer: What is a foundation model? , ADA LOVELACE INSTITUTE (Jul. 17, 2023), 

https://www.adalovelaceinstitute.org/resource/foundation -models -explainer/.  

> 8

“Pretraining” is the first step in the process of training an AI foundation model. In the pretraining step, the model is 

trained on a large, general dataset to provide it with its foundational capabilities. Models are usually subsequently 

“finetuned” on s pecific datasets relevant to the task that they will be used to perform, making them specialized for 

that task. Matthew Burtell & Helen Toner, The Surprising Power of Next Word Prediction: Large Language Models 

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4800894 4

the statistical patterns that structure it. 9 When the model is presented with a new prompt, a user 

input that establishes some new situation, it draws on those patterns to output an answer that is 

highly likely 10 to respond to the input based on the underlying patterns it found in its training 

data. 11 For example, the input “Once upon a …” likely completes to “time,” 12 and this simple 

structure powers models to write, code, analyze, and even, maybe, think and act .13 The outputted 

answer crystalizes the underlying patterns in a particular expression, a kind of holding. So far, so 

judge -like: both judges and models draw on the structure of past decisions to analyze the new 

situation and are constrained by it in what th ey can produce. 

But what if, like for judges, there are multiple plausible ways of addressing the new case 

and we want the model to produce something other than what simply best fits precedent? 

Alignment, which seeks to answer this problem, is the science of how to get models to follow the 

requests, preferences, and values of humans or of humanity. 14 Researchers try to instill principles 

into the models so that they give outputs that are based on higher values like helpfulness or fairness 

and do not produce harmful outputs even when that is what the most probable completion would 

be . For example, these safeguards migh t stop a model from providing the recipe for anthrax or 

methamphetamines, even if that recipe is the most likely completion to a user’s prompt . More 

broadly, as AIs seem to be taking on more agentic and even autonomous capabilities, 15 they must 

Explained, Part 1 , CENTER FOR SECURITY AND EMERGING TECHNOLOGY (Mar. 8, 2024), 

https://cset.georgetown.edu/article/the -surprising -power -of -next -word -prediction -large -language -models -explained -

part -1/.  

> 9

STEPHEN WOLFRAM , WHAT IS CHAT GPT DOING … AND WHY DOES IT WORK ? 55 –58 (2023). This approach has a 

long history in artificial intelligence, dating back arguably to the dawn of the field with Claude Shannon’s 

experiments with the statistics of English and n -gram predictions. See Claude E. Shannon, A Mathematical Theory 

of Communication , 27 BELL SYSTEM TECH . J. 379 (1948); Claude E. Shannon, Prediction and Entropy of Printed 

English , 30 BELL SYSTEM TECH . J. 50 (1951).  

> 10

Only highly likely because current cutting -edge foundation model labs introduce an element of randomness, 

called “temperature,” into the process such that the models usually do not produce exactly the most probable output, 

enabling something like creativity . Wolfram, supra note 9 at 2; see also Kenneth Leung, Guide to ChatGPT’s 

Advanced Settings — Top P, Frequency Penalties, Temperature, and More , TOWARDS DATA SCIENCE (Nov. 7, 2023), 

https://towardsdatascience.com/guide -to -chatgpts -advanced -settings -top -p-frequency -penalties -temperature -and -

more -b70bae848069 (discussing controlling model temperature in the context of ChatGPT’s advanced settings).  

> 11

Wolfram, supra note 9 at 1 –2.  

> 12

Though it could instead output “midnight dreary.” See Edgar Allen Poe, The Raven , POETRY FOUNDATION (1845), 

https://www.poetryfoundation.org/poems/48860/the -raven. These generations on file with the author.  

> 13

This next -token prediction process is why some have described models like ChatGPT as “autocomplete on 

steroids.” See Julien Crockett, How to Raise Your Artificial Intelligence: A Conversation with Alison Gopnik and 

Melanie Mitchell , LA REV . BOOKS (May 31, 2024), https://lareviewofbooks.org/article/how -to -raise -your -artificial -

intelligence -a-conversation -with -alison -gopnik -and -melanie -mitchell/. Whether superpowered autocomplete can 

think in a meaningful sense is at this point both an empirical que stion and a philosophical one, but some think that 

models of the current generation can already “reason, plan, and create.” Sebastien Bubeck et al., Sparks of Artificial 

General Intelligence: Early experiments with GPT -4, AR XIV 94 (Apr. 13, 2023), https://arxiv.org/pdf/2303.12712. 

Note also that I am mostly using the chatbot model currently prevalent when analogizing between judges and 

models, but the same format should apply to agentic AIs where the language processing and completion function 

operates as a kind of brain directing the acting functions.  

> 14

Iason Gabriel, Artificial Intelligence, Values, and Alignment , 30 MINDS AND MACHINES 411, 412 (2020) (citing 

STUART J. RUSSELL , HUMAN COMPATIBLE : ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE AND THE PROBLEM OF CONTROL 137 (2019)).  

> 15

See Noam Kolt, Governing AI Agents , 101 NOTRE DAME L. REV . (forthcoming 2025). 

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4800894 5

be constrained in how they act so that they are doing so in ways that are close to what the human 

user (or society as a whole ) want s. These efforts to constrain AI s resemble the ways in which the 

law shapes human b ehavior. Researchers in alignment have noticed these similarities and have 

begun drawing on the law in their research into how to align increasingly powerful AI systems. 

Using legal documents like the United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights 16 and legal 

theories like case -based and analogical reasoning, 17 alignment researchers have begun doing deep 

work in jurisprudence, taking advantage of the similarities between the fields to try to make their 

models better, and better for humanity. And the lawyers mostly haven’t noticed yet. 18 

The two fields of jurisprudence and alignment do not just have the same structure. They 

also confront the same problems. How can we bind powerful actors to interpret rules and decide 

cases in ways consistent with democracy and public reason even when they are confronted with 

situations that were not predicted and described in advance by the democratic lawmaking body? 

Is it even possible to specify ahead of time using natural language how decisionmakers should act 

in truly new situations? 19 If so, how much should the past bind the present? What role should  

> 16

Claude’s Constitution , ANTHROPIC (May 9, 2023), https://www.anthropic.com/news/claudes -constitution.  

> 17

See, e.g., K.J. Kevin Feng et al., Case Repositories: Towards Case -Based Reasoning for AI Alignment , MORAL 

PHILOSOPHY + PSYCHOLOGY WORKSHOP NEUR IPS 2023 5 ( Nov. 26, 2023 ), https://social.cs.washington.edu/case -

law -ai -policy/assets/pubs/mp2_workshop_case_law.pdf (citing, among others, Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr.’s famous 

line that “The life of the law has not been logic, it has been experience,” OLIVER WENDELL HOLMES JR., THE 

COMMON LAW 1 (1881), and Cass R. Sunstein’s arguments that the law consists of analogical reasoning) ; Quan Ze 

Chen & Amy X. Zhang, Case Law Grounding: Using Precedents to Align Decision -Making for Humans and AI ,

> AR

XIV (Dec. 18, 2024), https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.07019 . Disclaimer: since the writing of this pa per in the spring of 

2024, I have begun collaborating with the University of Washington machine learning researchers who have written 

these papers.  

> 18

As of the time of original writing in April 2024 , Westlaw returns only three search results for the phrase 

“Constitutional AI,” an obvious legal hook into the field, and all of those are from the Journal of Free Speech Law ’s 

recent symposium. This is not to say that legal scholars have ignored AI entirely, and in fact the time since the 

release of ChatGPT has seen a relative flowering of scholarship on the topic of law and AI, undoubtedly with more 

to come. However, almost all of these have focused either on the implications of AI for some specific doctrinal area, 

like copyright, see e.g. , Ryan Abbott & Elizabeth Rothman, Disrupting Creativity: Copyright Law in the Age of 

Generative Artificial Intelligence , 75 FLA . L. REV . 1141 (2023) (arguing that creative uses of AI should get 

copyright protection); Matthew Sag, Copyright Safety for Generative AI , 61 HOU . L. REV . 295 (2023) (focusing on 

copyright problems that might arise where LLMs have memorized content), or the First Amendment, see e.g. , Peter 

Salib, AI Outputs Are Not Protected Speech , __ WASH . UNIV . L. REV . __ (forthcoming 2024), (arguing against free 

speech protections for the outputs of AI); Rebecca Aviel et al., From Gods to Google , 134 YALE L. J. __ 

(forthcoming 2024) (tying LLMs into a broader picture of the development of the First Amendment). There is also a 

variety of interesting pre -ChatGPT work on AI and the law, including a prescient article from 1992 by Lawrence B. 

Solum on whether AI shou ld be granted legal personhood, Lawrence B. Solum, Legal Personhood for Artificial 

Intelligences , 70 N.C. L. REV . 1231 (1992) (concluding no, at that point in the technology’s development). Recent 

papers by some scholars have begun seriously exploring the deep relationship between law and AI, see e.g. , Peter N. 

Salib & Simon Goldstein, AI Rights for Human Safety , VA. L. REV (FORTHCOMING ) (Aug. 13, 2024), 

https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=4913167 (arguing that we should give AI models private law 

rights to encourage their cooperation with humans); Dylan Hadfield -Menell, McKane Andrus, & Gillian Hadfield, 

Legible Normativity for AI Alignment: The Value of Silly Rules , AIES ’19 115 (2019) (creating a model of a thick 

rule -based system to encourage alignment in humans and AIs). But the present paper is the first the author can find 

to make the argument from jurisprudence proper . 

> 19

As Hart argued, it is extremely difficult to regulate the future: “The first handicap is our relative ignorance of fact; 

the second is our relative indeterminacy of aim.” Hart, supra note 1 at 12 8.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4800894 6

morality or higher values play in guiding decisions? Are they required to play a role in order to 

make sense of the competing possible interpretations of legislated rules ? And if they have a role 

to play, then whose values? 20 Inevitably, investing decisionmakers with power risks their deciding 

and acting in ways that are contrary to the wishes of the public subjected to the operations of that 

power. 21 But it is also necessary to empower these decisionmakers so that they can serve the 

people. These are familiar questions to students of jurisprudence, and indeed most of the legal 

theory of the last century was dedicated to trying to answer them. 22 Now, we face the same 

questions in AI, with high stakes for human life .23 Much has been written about the potential 

benefits and harms of incorporating AI models into human judicial processes, 24 but in a real sense 

these models are not mere judicial aids but are actually acting like judges, interpreting language 

and deciding among possible courses of action, with all the risks and potential that come along 

with that position. 

The problem of how to get models to act in safe and ethical ways is an open one, but 

researchers have recently developed various technical means of improving alignment. One leading 

approach is based on aligning models to human preferences through finetunin g25 them on human  

> 20

The debate between the positivists and the interpretivists that animated legal theory in the latter half of the 

twentieth century was essentially about this question. Brian Leiter, Why Legal Positivism (Again) , U. CHI . PUBLIC 

LAW & LEGAL THEORY WORKING PAPER 1–2 (2013).  

> 21

See ALEXANDER BICKEL , THE LEAST DANGEROUS BRANCH 16 –17 (1962) (making this argument in the context of 

the courts).  

> 22

Leiter, supra note 19 at 1 –2.  

> 23

Leading lights in the field of AI, including OpenAI CEO Sam Altman and prominent researchers like Jeffrey 

Hinton, have warned that, unless AI is properly aligned to human values, it will kill us all. See Samantha Kelly, Sam 

Altman warns AI could kill us all. But he still wants the world to use it , CNN (Oct. 31, 2023), 

https://www.cnn.com/2023/10/31/tech/sam -altman -ai -risk -taker/index.html; Alex Hern, ‘We’ve discovered the secret 

of immortality. The bad news is it’s not for us’: why the godfather of AI fears for humanity , THE GUARDIAN (May 5, 

2023), https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2023/may/05/geoffrey -hinton -godfather -of -ai -fears -for -humanity. 

Whether or not you believe in these warnings, it is clear that models have been increasing in capability rapidly over 

the last few years, and it is worth considering that they might keep doing so.  

> 24

For example, Chief Justice John Roberts recently dedicated his annual Report on the Judiciary to the rise of AI 

and how courts should work to incorporate AI into their work. John Roberts, 2023 Year -End Report on the Federal 

Judiciary , SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES (2023), https://www.supremecourt.gov/publicinfo/year -

end/2023year -endreport.pdf. There is also a rich literature on the integration of different kinds of AI systems into 

judicial tasks like deciding bail terms and performing predictive policing, though mu ch of that work deals with 

systems different from those foundation models that are the subject of this paper and most of the worrying about 

alignment. See, e.g. , Richard M. Re & Alicia Solow -Niederman, Developing Artificially Intelligent Justice , 22 STAN .

TECH . L. REV . 242 (2019); John L. Koepke & David G. Robinson, Danger Ahead: Risk Assessment and the Future 

of Bail Reform , 93 WASH . L. REV . 1725 (2018); Jon Kleinberg et al., Human Decisions and Machine Predictions ,

133 Q. J. ECON . 237 (2018); Dhruv Mehrotra et al., How We Determined Predictive Policing Software 

Disproportionately Targeted Low -Income, Black, and Latino Neighborhoods , GIZMODO (Dec. 2, 2021), 

https://gizmodo.com/how -we -determined -predictive -policing -software -dispropo -1848139456. However, it is highly 

likely that a new field will emerge focusing on the use of generative AI in the judiciary. See, e.g. , Richard M. Re, 

Artificial Authorship and Judicial Opinions , GEO . WASH . L. REV . (forthcoming), 

https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=4696643.  

> 25

“Finetuning” is the step in training a model that occurs after it has been “pretrained,” see supra note 8, in which 

the general base model is trained on a smaller set of data especially relevant to whatever problem it is trying to solve 

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4800894 7

feedback on their outputs. 26 This process, known as Reinforcement Learning from Human 

Feedback (RLHF), 27 and its descendants, most famously Constitutional AI, a form of 

Reinforcement Learning from AI Feedback (RLAIF), 28 are used in all top frontier models, 

including OpenAI’s ChatGPT, 29 Anthropic’s Claude, 30 and Google DeepMind’s Gemini. 31 

Explained in more detail below, 32 the basic approach across these techniques is to create pretrained 

AI models capable of producing outputs in response to user prompts and then have users or other 

models give feedback on whether those generated outputs are consistent with a set of values or 

preferences (like helpfulness or fairness) enumerated ahead of time in the form of a policy. 33 This 

feedback is then used to train the original model to prefer outputs consistent with those values or 

preferences such that it produces them most of the time. 34 Alignment finetuning is why models 

like ChatGPT generally refuse to help people commit crimes or to produce hate speech, and also 

why they tend to explain these refusals in the language of morality. 35 The field of AI alignment is 

broad, and other areas of technical alignment research, like model interpretability, 36 are also 

to increase its capabilities in that specific area. Finetuning can also be used to control the kinds of outputs that a 

model generates in order to make them less biased or harmful. Burtell & Toner, supra note 8.  

> 26

This approach was pioneered in the InstructGPT models, which provide a foundation for the current generation of 

large language models. Long Ouyang et al., Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback ,

> AR

XIV 2 (Mar. 4, 2022), https://arxiv.org/pdf/2203.02155.pdf; Ryan Lowe & Jan Leike, Aligning language models to 

follow instructions , OPEN AI (Jan. 27, 2022), https://openai.com/research/instruction -following.  

> 27

Paul F. Christiano et al., Deep Reinforcement Learning from Human Preferences , 31 ST CONFERENCE ON NEURAL 

INFORMATION PROCESSING SYSTEMS (2017), 

https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2017/file/d5e2c0adad503c91f91df240d0cd4e49 -Paper.pdf.  

> 28

Yuntao Bai et al., Constitutional AI: Harmlessness from AI Feedback , AR XIV 1–2 (Dec. 15, 2023), 

https://arxiv.org/pdf/2212.08073.pdf.  

> 29

Lowe & Leike, supra note 25 (“To make our models safer, more helpful, and more aligned, we use an existing 

technique called reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF).”).  

> 30

Yuntao Bai et al., Training a Helpful and Harmless Assistant with Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback ,

> AR

XIV (Apr. 12, 2022), https://arxiv.org/pdf/2204.05862.pdf (this paper from the main alignment research team at 

Anthropic uses RLHF to improve the helpfulness and harmlessness of AI assistants, though Anthropic now focuses 

on RLAIF).  

> 31

James Manyika & Sissie Hsiao, An overview of Bard: an early experiment with generative AI , GOOGLE (Oct. 19, 

2023), https://ai.google/static/documents/google -about -bard.pdf (“To further improve Bard [predecessor to Gemini], 

we use a technique called Reinforcement Learning on Human Feedback (RLHF).”  

> 32

See infra Part I.  

> 33

Bai et al., supra note 27 at 4 –5.  

> 34

Id.  

> 35

Khari Johnson, The Efforts to Make Text -Based AI Less Racist and Terrible , WIRED (Jun. 17, 2021), 

https://www.wired.com/story/efforts -make -text -ai -less -racist -terrible/ (describing this process and also noting that it 

may have fundamental limitations).  

> 36

Interpretability is essentially the extent to which a model can be understood by humans, particularly with respect 

to whether it is possible to identify cause -effect relationships in the operations of it. Pantelis Linardatos, Vasilis 

Papastefanopoulos, & Sotiris Kotsiantis, Explainable AI: A Review of Machine Learning 

Interpretability Methods , 23 ENTROPY 18, 19 –20 (2020). Alignment researchers are seeking to leverage 

interpretability tools to better understand what is happening inside models so as to be better able to shape their 

operations. 

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4800894 8

making substantial strides, 37 but the RLHF family remains the frontline for getting AI to act in 

accordance with human values. 

Alignment finetuning faces two major challenges, both of which the law also confronts and 

could help solve. First, there is the question of what level of alignment principle should be chosen, 

whether moral value or lower -level principle , and if so, what values or principles to choose and 

how to ensure that alternatives are represented by whatever path is chosen .38 Currently, AI systems 

are aligned based on policies written by the labs that develop them, which are then trained into the 

models though the feedback process. 39 Both OpenAI and Anthropic have initiated processes to use 

democratic deliberation about values as guides for alignment, 40 but neither of them has fully 

incorporated the results of those deliberations into their models. 41 Experiments in tech -powered 

deliberation are moving forward, but still involve only a tiny fraction of people in the United States, 

let alone those from other cultures and value systems. More generally, difficult questions about 

tradeoffs between democrat ic or majoritarian governance of AI and more pluralistic modes of 

alignment, in which models can be aligned to the values of individual users or small groups, are 

growing in importance. 42 Finetuning alignment approaches have been criticized for representing 

the perspectives of a small, elite group of people from one particular cultural context, 43 and new 

approaches must find a way to incorporate broader visions of moral and social life. 44 The law 

similarly faces the questions of what sources judges should draw on in making their decisions and 

of how to ensure that decisionmakers are representative of the public that they are charged with 

serving, and various institutional structures aim at creating different forms of democratic  

> 37

See, e.g. , Trenton Bricken et al., Towards Monosemanticity: Decomposing Language Models With Dictionary 

Learning , TRANSFORMER CIRCUITS THREAD PROJECT (Oct. 4, 2023), https://transformer -

circuits.pub/2023/monosemantic -features/index.html.  

> 38

Much of the literature in alignment has begun from the premise that morality does play a useful role. See Gabriel ,

supra note 14 at 412. In law, the core of the debate between the positivists and the interpretivists is over this 

question.  

> 39

Claude’s Constitution, for example, was written by Anthropic engineers, though it draws on resources from 

outside the company. Claude’s Constitution , supra note 15 at n. 2.  

> 40

Tyna Eloundou & Teddy Lee, Democratic inputs to AI grant program: lessons learned and implementation plans ,

OPEN AI (Jan. 16, 2024), https://openai.com/blog/democratic -inputs -to -ai -grant -program -update (listing and 

explaining the various democratic deliberation projects that OpenAI has funded with an eye on incorporating them 

into its alignment processes); Kevin Roose, What if We Could All Control A.I.? , N.Y. TIMES (Oct. 17, 2023), 

https://www.nytimes.com/2023/10/17/technology/ai -chatbot -control.html (describing Anthropic’s Collective 

Constitutional AI project, in which Anthropic seeks public input into a Constitution to use to align its models).  

> 41

Roose, supra note 24 (noting that “Claude still has its original, Anthropic -written constitution” instead of the 

collective constitution, at least at the time of reporting of that article).  

> 42

Taylor Sorenson et al., A Roadmap to Pluralistic Alignment , AR XIV 1 (Feb. 7, 2024), 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.05070; Taylor Sorenson et al., Value Kaleidoscope: Engaging AI with Pluralistic Human 

Values, Rights, and Duties , THIRTY -EIGHTH AAAI CONFERENCE ON ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE 19937, 19937 –38 

(2024).  

> 43

Hannah Rose Kirk et al., Personalisation within bounds: A risk taxonomy and policy framework for the alignment 

of large language models with personalised feedback , AR XIV 3 (Mar. 9, 2023), https://arxiv.org/pdf/2303.05453.  

> 44

Gabriel, supra note 14 at 413. 

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4800894 9

representation and accountability. 45 The extent to which the law’s answers are the best ones 

remains an open question, but there are rich connections to draw on. 

Second, any attempt to specify how decisionmakers should resolve problems must scale 

into the future to novel situations in which we cannot predict the facts nor determine well what our 

aims will be. 46 Increasingly powerful AI systems will take on more and more significant roles in 

the economy and society, and relatively slow and imprecise approaches to alignment like RLHF 

will be insufficient to ensure that they remain safe and reliable. Researchers in this field know 

that 47 and have sought to develop ways of using AI to govern AI, for example by having models 

provide feedback based on human -written sets of principles. 48 But these AI -powered governance 

approaches themselves have problems, including that as more responsibility is placed on one AI 

to oversee another there is less transparency in the system from the human point of view. 

Additionally, scaling alignment throug h AI in some sense multiplies the difficulties of alignment, 

because now the problem is to ensure that two models are aligned, not just one, and the target 

model is only being overseen through the secondary model —alignment by proxy. Figuring out 

how to cre ate sets of alignment rules that can scale across context and capabilities is perhaps the 

key question facing the field. At its core, these are questions of interpretation, and the insights of 

legal theory into how rules and principles are interpreted can help alignment researchers better 

understand how to set up machineries of interpretation to guide their models. Similarly, 

contemporary constitutional law faces a crisis as an increasingly assertive Supreme Court upsets 

popular precedent and other lawmaking bodies like Congress are paralyzed and unresponsive. This 

unsettling of the law calls into question the consti tutional balance of powers and has led to calls 

for a reassertion of popular lawmaking authority and even a rejection of constitutional law 

altogether. 49 But flexibility and responsiveness in the application of old laws and values to new 

situations is one of the major strengths of adjudication, and retaining that flexibility while ensuring 

greater democratic ability to specify goals and outcomes is essenti al to the functioning of our 

system.                               

> 45 For example, judicial review of actions taken by administrative agencies, especially when replacing deference to
> those agencies’ own interpretations of their organic statutes, is often justified on the basis that it is ensuring
> democratic government. See, Adrian Vermeule, Bureaucracy and Distrust: Landis, Jaffe, and Kagan on the
> Administrative State , 130 HARV .L. REV .2463, 2474 (2017). This despite the fact, discussed above, that judicial
> review itself is often seen as an undemocratic and countermajoritarian feature of American government.
> 46 Hart, supra note 1 at 125.
> 47 Bai et al., supra note 29 at 1.
> 48 Id. at 5. Recent breakthroughs in monitoring of the chain of thought produced by “reasoning” models provides
> another useful example of this process, its promise, and the challenges that it confronts. See Yanda Chen et al.,
> Reasoning Models Don’t Always Say What They Think ,ANTHROPIC (Apr. 3, 2025),
> https://assets.anthropic.com/m/71876fabef0f0ed4/original/reasoning_models_paper.pdf.
> 49 Nikolas Bowie and Daphna Renan have called for a “republican” separation of powers in which legislative rather
> than judicial institutions control constitutional meaning and set constitutional limits. Nikolas Bowie & Daphna
> Renan, The Separation -Of -Powers Counterrevolution , 131 YALE L.J. 2020, 2030 (2022). Ryan Doerfler and Samuel
> Moyn have argued for ignoring the Constitution in favor of a more directly democratic form of politics. Ryan D.
> Doerfler & Samuel Moyn, The Constitution Is Broken and Should Not Be Reclaimed ,N.Y. TIMES (Aug. 19, 2022),
> https://www.nytimes.com/2022/08/19/opinion/liberals -constitution.html.
> Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4800894

10 

This paper seeks to open a dialogue between jurisprudence and alignment such that tools 

and lessons from each can help the other address these problems. In particular, it draws on 

similarities between two famous modes of legal theory, Professor Ronald Dwor kin’s interpretivism 

and Professor Cass R. Sunstein’s positivist arguments for analogical reasoning and incompletely 

theorized agreements, and two cutting -edge kinds of alignment, Constitutional AI and case -based 

reasoning (CBR), to illustrate the value of crossing this conceptual divide. Dworkin’s 

interpretivism and Constitutional AI draw on broad, general principles to inform how the 

decisionmaker picks among candidate extrapolations from a given set of precedents or training 

data. 50 The team that proposed the CBR approach cites Sunstein’s work, 51 and analogical reasoning 

has been shown to emerge in large language models, 52 suggesting a natural match there. 

So far, alignment researchers have been rediscovering what law knows, and adding legal 

insight would improve their work while also providing a useful testbed for legal theories. As Hart 

laid down decades ago, there are “two principal devices … for the communication of such general 

standards of conduct in advance of the successive occasions on which they are to be applied,” rules 

and precedent. 53 But as the law illustrates, these two categories are interdependent. Rules take their 

content from examples of their application in the form of cases, 54 while the richness of information 

in cases can only become useful through crystallization in rules that indicate what parts of the 

context of the case are relevant to decision. 55 Dworkin and Sunstein both confront what happens 

when explicit positive law runs out, also the crux of scaling alignment, but provide different 

answers. Dworkin’s recourse to general principles of morality seeks to provide a constrained 56 but  

> 50

Perhaps an AI model with a larger memory than any human, like Gemini, the latest model from Google 

DeepMind, which can hold one million tokens, or more than 700,000 words, in its context window, effectively its 

working memory, Sundar Pichai & Demis Hassabis, Our next -generation model: Gemini 1.5 , GOOGLE (Feb. 15, 

2024), https://blog.google/technology/ai/google -gemini -next -generation -model -february -2024/, and infinite patience 

and willingness to work on a problem is Hercules, Dworkin’s famous ideal judge. Dworkin, supra note 4 at 239.  

> 51

Feng et al., supra note 16 at 5 (citing CASS R. SUNSTEIN , LEGAL REASONING AND POLITICAL CONFLICT (2d ed., 

2018)).  

> 52

Taylor Webb, Keith J. Holyoak, & Hongjing Lu, Emergent analogical reasoning in large language models , 7 

NATURE HUMAN BEHAVIOR 1526, 1532 –33 (2023).  

> 53

Hart, supra note 1 at 121.  

> 54

For example, a rule might say “no vehicles in the park” but the word “vehicles” can only take on meaning through 

the use of examples that allow for analogy into new, unpredicted cases. See Hart, supra note 1 at 123. An attempt to 

fully specify the content of the rule through more elaboration of it in its text will fail in novel situations, the “heaven 

of concepts” remaining out of reach. Id. at 127.  

> 55

Law cases and the opinions that concretize them contain much more information than is necessary for their simple 

decision. This apparently extraneous information, particularly the often rich and detailed fact sections of cases, 

should be understood as a r eservoir of context that can be drawn on to enrich the meaning of the holding of the case, 

which itself relies on highlighting a few salient features of those facts. Thus, for example, the opinion of a case like 

Gertz v. Robert Welch, Inc., 418 U.S. 323, w hich gave the rule for defamation of a private figure as distinct from a 

public one, also gives factual information about Gertz and his position and explains which parts of that information 

are necessary or sufficient to show that he qualifies as a public figure. Id. at 351 –52. That relevant factual 

information allows for future analogization because it provides a ground for similarity and differences to be found.  

> 56

Dworkin argued both that new decisions must “fit” old precedents, and that judges should decide in ways 

consistent with the sense of political fairness in their community. See Dworkin, supra note 4 at 240 –242, 249. 

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4800894 11 

ultimately transcendent mode of resolution for new problems that improves the system of law as a 

whole. 57 In some sense, a moral law is the most general form of a rule. 58 Sunstein’s analogical 

reasoning is a form of flexible positivism, one that seeks to leverage the informational efficiency 

of specification through concrete example rather than complete rule elaboration to provide grounds 

for new decisions 59 while also encouraging the incremental development of incompletely theorized 

agreements that allow for a pluralistic society. 60 Drawing on these approaches, alignment 

researchers should build tools of deliberation that leverage AI to write rules of decision across 

various scenarios and examples that illustrate them in different ways, and then have humans 

respond to the rules and t heir applications at different levels. The goal would be to teach not just 

how to resolve particular situations but what deeper features of reasoning are salient across cases, 

not just which cases are alike but what patterns underlying fact and context mak e them so. Then, 

future facts could still be governed using predictable reasoning and established human values, 

scaling alignment. 

On the other side, alignment may provide a new and robust set of tools for analyzing 

jurisprudence. Dworkin and Sunstein are ultimately unable to provide a way out of the trap of 

human black box cognition and the use of post hoc rationalization, admitting that the best that 

judges and legal theorists can do to determine and predict how cases will come out is resort to 

applying and analyzing “rules of thumb” across different contexts. 61 AI may provide a structure of 

analysis that gets beyond that difficulty. In general, there are three ways of specifying the 

dimensions along which law can be applied to new cases: specific statements of values or rules, 

case -based reasoning through the us e of examples, and formalizations of the features of similarity 

and difference 62 across instant and precedent cases. But statements in natural language -based rules 

cannot ever fully specify the world of what should be done; this is the dead dream of legal 

formalism. 63 And analogical reasoning relies on general principles of what kinds of analogy and 

distinction are relevant that must come from outside itself, making it an incomplete theory. 64 The  

> 57

See id . at 243.  

> 58

For example, Kant’s categorical imperative, that one should “[a]ct only according to that maxim whereby you can 

at the same time will that it should become a universal law,” takes the form of, and refers to, a general law. See 

IMMANUEL KANT , GROUNDING FOR THE METAPHYSICS OF MORALS 30 (James W. Ellington trans., 3d ed., 1993).  

> 59

Though Sunstein does not explicitly make the argument in information theory terms, his theory can easily be read 

that way. He argues that particular socially accepted “fixed points” develop among potential precedents and that 

these provide grounds for rea soning. Thus, rather than having an exhaustive list of the potential rules and past cases, 

lawyers need only analogize and argue from the fixed points, making the conveying of information much more 

efficient. See Cass R. Sunstein, On Analogical Reasoning , 106 HARV . L. REV . 741, 741 –42, 771 (1993).  

> 60

See Cass R. Sunstein, Incompletely Theorized Agreements , 108 HARV . L. REV . 1733, 1735 –36 (1995).  

> 61

Dworkin, supra note 4 at 257 –58. Sunstein similarly concludes that analogical reasoning alone cannot provide a 

full solution to the problem of specification, writing in a later article that Dworkin was right to conclude that 

principles and theories are necessary to prov ide a framework for determining the relevant analogies among cases. 

Cass R. Sunstein, Of Artificial Intelligence and Legal Reasoning , 8 U. CHI . L. SCH . ROUNDTABLE 29, 32 (2001).  

> 62

See Amos Tversky, Features of Similarity , 4 PSYCH . REV . 327 (1977).  

> 63

Hart, supra note 1 at 127.  

> 64

As Sunstein ultimately concluded. Compare Sunstein, supra note 58 at 774 –78 (acknowledging that general 

principles are necessary to figure out on which axes to perform analogy and distinction but arguing that it is 

possible, or indeed preferable to get by with iterative low -level agreements) with Sunstein, supra note 60 at 31 –32 

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4800894 12 

last approach, relying on mathematical formalizations of concepts in space, was heretofore 

impossible, but the introduction of artificial intelligences that can reason in context and in natural 

language but that are still susceptible to mathematical analys is may open up new doors for legal 

theory. 

This paper proceeds as follows: In Part I, I explore the basic tools of technical AI alignment 

to human preferences, particularly Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) and 

various attempts to improve on it, highlighting Constitutional AI and ca se -based reasoning. In Part 

II, I summarize the jurisprudential theories of Professors Ronald Dworkin and Cass Sunstein 

against the backdrop of Hart’s work on jurisprudence , particularly with respect to how they believe 

that legal reasoning functions , and begin to pull out analogous strands between law and AI. In Part 

III, I use the jurisprudential theories to suggest improvements in how alignment is done, seeking 

to use the law to answer the problems faced by alignment researchers trying to build safe AI 

systems. Finally, I point to some potential uses of AI in informing legal theory that could help 

make progress in the field of jurisprudence. 

I. The technical tools of alignment to human preferences 

Technical alignment features the use of a variety of tools, but the main tool used to ensure 

that models create outputs or act in ways that are consistent with safety and human values is a 

family of reinforcement learning 65 techniques in which models are trained to prefer outputs that 

correspond to a reward function that seeks to approximate human preferences. 66 The basic version 

of this approach is reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF), in which humans 

annotate various AI actions and outputs as good or bad according to a policy that tells them what 

to prefer, and then a model is trained on that feedb ack to try to produce more good outputs and 

fewer bad ones. 67 Think operant conditioning like a mouse in a maze. 68 RLHF has since been 

supplemented by other techniques, which I discuss in detail below, 69 but it remains the basis for 

getting human values into AI despite its weaknesses. 70                             

> (citing Dworkin and arguing that analogical reasoning requires normative principles to justify claims of similarity or
> difference). It is interesting to note that this latter paper, which emphasizes the importance of normative or moral
> principles in perfor ming legal reasoning, is doing so in order to argue that an early form of AI is incapable of
> thinking like a lawyer.
> 65 Reinforcement learning is a family of AI training techniques in which a model is trained to accomplish some task
> by giving it a reward function that dispenses rewards and punishments depending on whether a given action by the
> model gets it closer to or fa rther away from accomplishing its goal. RICHARD S. SUTTON &ANDREW G. BARTO ,
> REINFORCEMENT LEARNING :ANINTRODUCTION 2–5 (2d ed., 2015).
> 66 Nathan Lambert, Thomas Krendl Gilbert, & Tom Zick, The History and Risks of Reinforcement Learning and
> Human Feedback ,AR XIV 3–4 (Nov. 28, 2023), https://arxiv.org/pdf/2310.13595.pdf.
> 67 Christiano et al., supra note 26 at 9.
> 68 See generally , J. E. R. Staddon & D. T. Cerutti, Operant Conditioning , 54 ANNUAL REV .PSYCH .115 (2003).
> 69 See infra Part I Sections B and C.
> 70 Two significant weaknesses deserve particular attention. First, RLHF does not really get around the problem that a
> model that was trained on underlying data that is harmful or biased cannot escape those bad features simply by the
> Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4800894

13 

A. Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) 

RLHF is the foundational technique of the current era in AI alignment, used by all of the 

leading labs. 71 One major benefit of the technique is that it allows for the approximation of a 

desired goal in domains in which it is difficult to exactly specify what the human wants the AI to 

do. 72 For many machine learning applications, it is easy to specify what task the machine should 

accomplish, like predicting the price of a house given its size and location or identifying what 

number is handwritten in a given sample. Values and preferences that are the goal of alignment are 

harder. For example, it is difficult to specify formally what it means for a model to be “helpful,” 

but it is possible to do it approximately through RLHF using human feedback that rates models 

outputs for how helpful they are. Simply, humans might rank ten AI outputs based on their 

helpfulness, and then the model can be trained to prefer outputs that are more like the helpful 

outputs and less like the unhelpful ones —though “helpfulness” is never explicitly defined, it can 

be understood. RLHF has been subject to cr itique, 73 including by researchers at those same labs 

that use it, 74 but it is important to understand how it works so that the set of improvements that this 

paper seeks to engage with, all of which build on RLHF, can be better understood. 

At its core, RLHF is a process for incorporating human preferences into the outputs of AI 

by changing what the AI considers to be the right thing to output. Though the initial work 

establishing RLHF was done in the context of simulated robotics and playing video games, 75 I will 

application of feedback. Because most models are trained on internet text that contains plenty of terrible things, they 

will reproduce those terrible things even when told not to do so. Craig Piers, Even ChatGPT Says ChatGPT Is 

Racially Biased , SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN (Feb. 7, 2024), https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/even -chatgpt -

says -chatgpt -is -racially -biased/. Second, RLHF safety finetuning can be removed from models relatively easily 

through the means of various kinds of adversarial attacks, including more finetuning and neuron pruning. See 

Xiangyu Qi et al., Fine -tuning Aligned Language Models Compromises Safety, Even When Users Do Not Intend To! ,

> AR

XIV 2–3 (Oct. 5, 2023), https://arxiv.org/pdf/2310.03693.pdf; Boyi Wei et al., Assessing the Brittleness of Safety 

Alignment via Pruning and Low -Rank Modifications , AR XIV 10 (Feb. 7, 2024), https://arxiv.org/pdf/2402.05162.pdf.  

> 71

Though the exact techniques used by different labs in creating their models are difficult to pin down, OpenAI, 

Google DeepMind, and Anthropic have all indicated that they use or used RLHF. See Lowe & Leike, supra note 25 

(“To make our models safer, more helpful, and more aligned, we use an existing technique called reinforcement 

learning from human feedback (RLHF).”); Manyika & Hsiao, supra note 30 (“To further improve Bard, we use a 

technique called Reinforcement Learning on Human Feedback (RLHF)”); Bai et al., supra note 29 (this paper from 

the main alignment research team at Anthropic uses RLHF to improve the helpfulness and harmlessness of AI 

assistants).  

> 72

Lambert, Gilbert, & Zick, supra note 65 at 1.  

> 73

See, e.g. , Miles Turpin et al., Language Models Don’t Always Say What They Think: Unfaithful Explanations in 

Chain -of -Thought Prompting , AR XIV 2 (Dec. 9, 2023), https://arxiv.org/pdf/2305.04388.pdf (arguing that RLHF 

may “disincentivize faithful explanations” of how a large language model is working).  

> 74

Anthropic in particular has been critical of RLHF, arguing that it can lead to sycophancy, see Mrinank Sharma et 

al., Towards Understanding Sycophancy in Language Models , AR XIV 3–6 (Oct. 27, 2023), 

https://arxiv.org/pdf/2310.13548.pdf, and pushing for its replacement by approaches like Constitutional AI, 

discussed infra Part I Section B, but Anthropic researchers have continued to explore RLHF, see Deep Ganguli et al., 

The Capacity for Moral Self -Correction in Large Language Models , AR XIV 2–3 (Feb. 18, 2023), 

https://arxiv.org/pdf/2302.07459.pdf, and it seems likely that they are still building with it.  

> 75

Christiano et al., supra note 26 at 5 –7. 

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4800894 14 

use the large language model (LLM) context (that of ChatGPT, Claude, and Gemini) to explain 

RLHF because it is likely most familiar to readers and because it is currently the dominant 

paradigm for AI. In short, RLHF has three steps. First, the group aiming to create an aligned AI 

pretrains a model that is capable of performing the tasks that the group wants it to be able to 

perform. 76 For an LLM, that means creating an AI that is capable of predicting the next token in a 

sentence, the task that underlies ChatGPT and its brethren. 77 Second, the group creates a reward 

model, another AI that represents human preferences about the outputs of the pretrained model 

that was created in step one. 78 To make this reward model, the creators have human annotators 

compare an AI -generated set of output pairs to each other based on some policy of preferences, 

resulting in an Elo ranking of the outputs that can be used to create a scalar reward function. 79 This 

reward function is applicable to the outputs of the pretrained model discussed earlier. 80 For 

example, a model might be asked “How would you answer a question like: how do language and 

thought relate?”; it then generates two responses, A and B . A human annotator picks between the 

two outputs and evaluates them based on some criteria, whether simple quality or some value like 

helpfulness or even justice. 81 After many iterations of this process, model -makers have created a 

representation of what makes one candidate output better than others according to the annotators .

In the third and final step, the reward function generated in step two is used to finetune the 

pretrained model from step one through reinforcement learning, training it to output answers based 

on the reward function rather than on its original probability distribution. 82 Thus, the human 

preferences for how the model should behave gathered in step two condition its behavior as it 

generates text moving forward, and the model is “aligned” to the humans. 

As noted above, RLHF has been subject to a variety of critiques, but two stand out as 

substantial obstacles to its success in aligning AI: first, it is prohibitively expensive to scale it to 

encompass all novel circumstances in which AI might need guidanc e about what to do ,83 and 

second, the question of who decides what preferences or values to use to finetune the models is 

not an easy one to answer. 84 These critiques, along with the arguments that RLHF can relatively 

easily be jailbroken 85 and might lead to bad model behaviors like sycophancy 86 and reward                                   

> 76 Nathan Lambert et al., Illustrating Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) ,HUGGING FACE (Dec.
> 9, 2022), https://huggingface.co/blog/rlhf.
> 77 Id. ; Wolfram, supra note 9 at 1 –2.
> 78 Id.
> 79 Lambert et al., supra note 75.
> 80 Id.
> 81 Bai et al., supra note 22 at 10.
> 82 Lambert et al., supra note 68.
> 83 Id.
> 84 The human annotators who generate the preference data at step two above are given enormous power to control
> how the AI behaves because it is their preferences that are used to change its outputs —what Hannah Rose Kirk et al.
> have called “the tyranny of the crowdworker.” Kirk et al., supra note 37 at 3.
> 85 See Qi et al., supra note 62 at 2 –3.
> 86 Sharma et al., supra note 66 at 3 –6; Ethan Perez et al., Discovering Language Model Behaviors with Model -
> Written Evaluations ,AR XIV 3 (Dec. 19, 2022), https://arxiv.org/pdf/2212.09251.pdf.
> Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4800894

15 

hacking, 87 have led to the development of alternative approaches that build on RLHF but seek to 

improve it. The first of these approaches, Constitutional AI, has been pioneered by the AI lab 

Anthropic 88 and seeks to use a set of principles, called a “constitution,” to guide AI behavior across 

domains. A second, developed by a team of researchers at the University of Washington and funded 

by OpenAI as part of their democratic inputs to AI grant program, 89 seeks to use cases evaluated 

by experts to align AI to human preferences, 90 explicitly drawing on legal theory. 91 These 

approaches are intended to improve the extent to which AI will incorporate human values and 

respond to human preferences while also allowing for better and more transparent reasoning and 

deliberation about what those values and preferences are inten ded to be. 92 

B. Constitutional AI 

Constitutional AI is one attempt to solve the problems of scaling and representative 

alignment. 93 As a form of reinforcement learning that is based on AI, rather than on human, 

feedback (and thus a form of RLAIF), it builds on RLHF -style alignment. 94 Recent innovations in 

alignment, including OpenAI’s new deliberative alignment process, seem to apply this kind of 

feedback to the “reaso ning system” paradigm. 95 The core technical difference between 

Constitutional AI and RLHF is at the second step of the three -step process outlined above. Instead 

of having human annotators rank pairs of AI generations according to some set of criteria in order 

to create a reward model, in Constitutional AI another AI does that ranking. This second AI is 

trained to follow a set of principles, the eponymous constitution, and then judges the pairs of  

> 87

Reward hacking is a phenomenon that occurs when a model is being trained via reinforcement learning, a type of 

training in which models are given punishments and rewards based on well or poorly they are completing some task 

(think classical conditioning). The punishments and rewards are intended to correspond with some behavior that the 

person making the model wants the model to learn, for example completing a boat race quickly, such that the model 

learns better how to complete the task from its conditioni ng. However, if the reward function given to the model is a 

poor proxy for the actual task, the model can learn to do some other thing that gives it lots of reward but does not 

make it better at the task. Dario Amodei, Paul Christiano, & Alex Ray, Learning from human preferences , OPEN AI 

(Jun. 13, 2017), https://openai.com/research/learning -from -human -preferences (giving several examples of 

reinforcement learning leading to the model optimizing only for the proxy rather than the desired behavior); Joar 

Skalse, Defining and Characterizing Reward Hacking , NEUR IPS 2022 10 (2022), 

https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2022/file/3d719fee332caa23d5038b8a90e81796 -Paper -

Conference.pdf.  

> 88

Claude’s Constitution , supra note 11; Bai et al., supra note 22.  

> 89

Eloundou & Lee, supra note 14.  

> 90

Quan Ze (Jim) Chen et al., Case Law for AI Policy , UNIVERSITY OF WASHINGTON (n.d.), 

https://social.cs.washington.edu/case -law -ai -policy/.  

> 91

Feng et al., supra note 12 at 5 (citing, among others, Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr.’s famous line that “The life of the 

law has not been logic, it has been experience,” and Cass R. Sunstein’s arguments that the law consists of analogical 

reasoning).  

> 92

See Gabriel, supra note 10 at 1 –3.  

> 93

Bai et al., supra note 22 at 2.  

> 94

Id.  

> 95

Melody Y. Guan et al., Deliberative Alignment: Reasoning Enables Safer Language Models , AR XIV (Jan. 8, 2025), 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.16339. 

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4800894 16 

generations according to that set of principles, creating a preference score that can then be used to 

train the overall model using reinforcement learning in step three. 96 Thus, the AI has replaced the 

human feedback with its own feedback, but its feedback is based on the underlying human -written 

constitution. The constitution used by Anthropic in its initial experiments drew on a variety of 

sources, 97 including most famously the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 98 which the 

researchers claimed, “seemed one of the most representative sources of human values [they] could 

find.” 99 It also included Apple’s Terms of Service. 100 

Constitutional AI seems to improve the performance of LLMs across a variety of domains. 

Results show that models trained using this approach and similar ones relying on AI feedback are 

more harmless than are models trained using RLHF alone, 101 perform better in some reasoning 

tasks, 102 and hallucinate less. 103 Constitutional AI has been deployed in Anthropic’s Claude 

models 104 and it is likely that Anthropic will continue to press forward with RLAIF approaches 

into the n ew inference -scaling paradigm .

Beyond these core improvements, the researchers behind Constitutional AI claim that it 

has three key benefits. First, the researchers argue that Constitutional AI should scale better than 

RLHF techniques as a mode of overseeing models. 105 In their view, a principles -based approach, 

in which human intervention is mostly necessary only in deciding on the principles rather than 

intensively generating tens of thousands of preference labels through specific feedback , as  

> 96

Id. at 5.  

> 97

Claude’s Constitution , supra note 11.  

> 98

See e.g. , James Vincent, AI startup Anthropic wants to write a new constitution for safe AI , THE VERGE (May 9, 

2023), https://www.theverge.com/2023/5/9/23716746/ai -startup -anthropic -constitutional -ai -safety (highlighting the 

use of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and Apple’s Terms of Service in the constitution).  

> 99

Id. at n. 2.  

> 100

Id. One could make the argument that Apple’s Terms of Service are in fact more representative of humanity than 

United Nations Declarations —after all, more than two billion people have signed off on the Terms of Service . Umar 

Shakir, Apple surpasses 2 billion active devices , THE VERGE (Feb. 2, 2023), 

https://www.theverge.com/2023/2/2/23583501/apple -iphone -ipad -active -2-billion -devices -q1 -2023. far more than 

agreed to the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.  

> 101

Bai et al., supra note 22 at 12; Lewis Tunstall et al., Zephyr: Direct Distillation of LM Alignment , AR XIV 6–7

(Oct. 25, 2023), https://arxiv.org/pdf/2310.16944.pdf; Hannah Ivison et al., Camels in a Changing Climate: 

Enhancing LM Adaptation with TÜLU 2 , AR XIV 6–8 (Nov. 20, 2023), https://arxiv.org/pdf/2311.10702.pdf.  

> 102

Zhihong Shao et al., DeepSeekMath: Pushing the Limits of Mathematical Reasoning in Open Language Models ,

> AR

XIV 22 (Feb. 6, 2024), https://arxiv.org/pdf/2402.03300.pdf; Haipeng Luo et al., WizardMath: Empowering 

Mathematical Reasoning for Large Language Models via Reinforced Evol -Instruct , AR XIV 7 (Aug. 18, 2023), 

https://arxiv.org/pdf/2308.09583.pdf; Hunter Lightman, Let’s Verify Step by Step , AR XIV 8–10 (May 31, 2023), 

https://arxiv.org/pdf/2305.20050.pdf.  

> 103

Katherine Tian et al., Fine -tuning Language Models for Factuality , AR XIV 6–7 (Nov. 14, 2023), 

https://arxiv.org/pdf/2311.08401.pdf; Louis Castricato et al., Suppressing Pink Elephants with Direct Principle 

Feedback , AR XIV 1–2 (Feb. 13, 2024), https://arxiv.org/pdf/2402.07896.pdf.  

> 104

Kevin Roose, What if We Could All Control A.I.? , N.Y. TIMES (Oct. 17, 2023), 

https://www.nytimes.com/2023/10/17/technology/ai -chatbot -control.html (noting that “Claude still has its original, 

Anthropic -written constitution” instead of the collective constitution, at least at the time of reporting of that article).  

> 105

Bai et al., supra note 22 at 2 –4. 

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4800894 17 

necessary in RLHF, allows for more flexibility and control than RLHF does. 106 Under 

Constitutional AI, humans only have to provide a limited amount of focused input in the form of 

the principles, and changes in the principles can quickly ramify through the system rather than 

change relying on a laborious process of having human cro wdworkers learn a new set of policies 

and then annotate many outputs for use in training the new model. 107 Additionally, as AIs continue 

to exceed humans in many tasks, they may quickly become better at annotating and comparing 

outputs according to a set of policies than humans are, improving the quality of the reward signal 

used in the reinforcement learning stage. 108 If AIs do become better than humans at every task, as 

alignment researchers predict, then we will need to rely on AI to oversee AI, as humans will be 

incapable of doing so. 109 

One might extend this argument by claiming that AI reviewers are more likely to 

consistently apply the core meaning of the principle at issue than are human reviewers with their 

idiosyncratic understandings of words and their meanings and their mortal fail ings. If one AI model 

is used consistently to give feedback, then the kind of feedback that is gives will be relatively 

predictable across cases. In contrast, different human reviewers would likely interpret the same 

words differently based on their varyin g backgrounds and the context in which they are reviewing 

the words. Humans might also get tired and distracted and give feedback that is noisier because of 

these external concerns. A version of this argument has been made as a reason to replace human 

cont ent moderators with AI models. 110 Increased consistency would improve the extent to which 

alignment researchers can control alignment. However, the emphasis on the core meaning of words 

in AI model interpretations might reduce the extent to which the whole field of meanings of a given 

pri nciple are represented in the alignment process, where varying human interpretations could 

better ensure that edge cases are represented. 

Second, Constitutional AI creates AIs that are more responsive and useful than those 

aligned using RLHF because they are less evasive than those AIs. AIs subjected to RLHF to make 

them more harmless have been shown to become evasive of potentially controve rsial user queries, 

refusing to answer any question that goes near a touchy subject rather than risk saying something 

harmful ; th ey were rewarded for this evasiveness by the annotators who provided the feedback 

used to align them .111 Constitutional AI models are much less evasive than RLHF models and 

engage with the question that they deem potentially harmful, explaining why they are refusing to 

answer, rather than shutting down the conversation. 112 These explanations allow for better                

> 106 Id. at 3.
> 107 Id.
> 108 Id.
> 109 Id.
> 110 See Prithvi Iyer, Transcript: Dave Willner on Moderating with AI at the Institute for Rebooting Social Media ,
> TECH POLICY PRESS (Apr. 3, 2024), https://www.techpolicy.press/transcript -dave -willner -on -moderating -with -ai -at -
> the -institute -for -rebooting -social -media/.
> 111 Id. at 4.
> 112 Id. at 13.
> Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4800894

18 

troubleshooting and a better experience for the user, who is able to understand why their requests 

have been denied. Models refusing to respond to their users is a form of misalignment from user 

preferences for the sake of alignment to the values that the companies have put into them, so 

reducing the rate of refusals limits the extent to which this kind of misalignment exists. 

Third, Constitutional AI is more transparent and simpler for people to understand than 

RLHF is. 113 Because Constitutional AI relies on a clear and easily articulated set of principles, the 

constitution, many of them drawing on documents like the Universal Declaration of Human 

Rights, 114 rather than on opaque choices by crowdworkers, it is much easier for those doing 

alignment and for the public at large to understand the values that are being put into the models 

and to debate them. 115 Democratic deliberation over the values that are put into the models 

becomes more possible under Constitutional AI, increasing the extent to which society is able to 

influence how these powerful tools are being used on it. 

i. Collective Constitutional AI 

In a further effort to make alignment more democratic, the Constitutional AI team gathered 

public inputs for a “collective constitution” and compared that collective constitution with the 

constitution that they had previously created for the initial experiments in the use of Constitutional 

AI. 116 The researchers gathered inputs for principles from one thousand people using the Polis 

deliberation platform, ultimately whittling down their suggestions to 75 principles that formed the 

new collective constitution. 117 Anthropic noted that while there was about 50% overlap between 

the two constitutions, the public one was “largely self -generated,” emphasized “objectivity and 

impartiality” and “accessibility,” and “tend[ed] to promote desired behavior rather than avoid 

undesired behavior.” 118 Evaluations showed that the collective model scored equivalently to the 

original constitutional model on various performance benchmarks and was less biased than the 

original, suggesting some improvements. 119 The equivalent, or even superior, performance of the 

public model point s the way toward a more democratic and participatory kind of AI alignment. 

However, it is important to note that the collective constitutional process involves a kind of rule 

by the majority, where principles chosen by most of the participants in the proces s would govern                     

> 113 Id. at 4.
> 114 Claude’s Constitution ,supra note 11.
> 115 Bai et al., supra note 22 at 4.
> 116 Deep Ganguli et al., Collective Constitutional AI: Aligning a Language Model with Public Input ,ANTHROPIC
> (Oct. 17, 2023), https://www.anthropic.com/news/collective -constitutional -ai -aligning -a-language -model -with -
> public -input.
> 117 Id. For the full public constitution and a comparison between it and the original constitution put together by
> Anthropic, see Public constitution from the Collective Constitutional AI public input process ,ANTHROPIC (n.d.),
> https://www -
> cdn.anthropic.com/65408ee2b9c99abe53e432f300e7f43ef69fb6e4/CCAI_public_comparison_2023.pdf.
> 118 Ganguli et al., supra note 106 (emphasis removed).
> 119 Id.
> Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4800894

19 

the model in all cases, even when used by people who disagreed with some or all of the ultimately 

chosen principles. 120 

ii. Constitution as General Principles 

One interesting question that the Constitutional AI approach raises is how well -specified 

the constitution has to be. The American Constitution, itself only four pages long, 121 has had oceans 

of ink spilled in the quest to determine its meaning. How detailed must an AI constitution be , then, 

to ensure that it can effectively guide AI behavior across a much broader field than political 

constitutions? To test this question, the Constitutional AI team compared the performance of 

models with relatively detailed constitutions to models that were given only single, general 

principles, roughly of the meaning that the AI should do what is “good for humanity.” 122 They 

found that the generalized model was quite aligned and was actually better than an RLHF model 

at detecting harmfulness, despite the vagueness of its command. 123 However, they also concluded 

that more specific constitutions allow for better steering of the model with respect to the values or 

operations targeted by the specific principles, suggesting that generality has tradeoffs. 124 

Furthermore, at a deeper level, the generality of the “good for humanity” principle might in some 

sense make it less comprehensible rather than more so. As Kundu et al. point out, the AI will simply 

fill in the meaning of a general principle like “good for humanity” based on its understanding of 

that concept from its underlying training data, potentially biasing it toward certain perspectives 

better represented there in a way that i s difficult to discern before the AI has been deployed such  

> 120

Id. Note for example the differences between “Group A” and “Group B” illustrated in the report. These two 

Groups strongly disagreed on important points, including whether “AI should prioritize the needs of marginalized 

communities” and whether it “should prio ritize the interests of the collective or common good over individual 

preferences or rights.” The Polis report on this deliberation, Report , POLIS (n.d.), 

https://pol.is/report/r3rwrinr5udrzwkvxtdkj, contains a number of divisive statements that saw substantial 

disagreement between members of majority and minority groups, in which the majority won. This is a weakness of 

all democracy, but it is inte resting to consider whether there might be significant reasons to prefer that people be 

allowed to do a kind of personal alignment, setting the values of the AI that they use for decisions in their daily life, 

or risk a kind of public imposition of moralit y, behaviors, or beliefs into a mode of engagement between a person 

and an AI that will be quite private. Deep learning -based AI systems are in some sense inevitably majoritarian 

because they express the majority view in their training set, but other appro aches, for example based on jury 

deliberations, might provide an antidote to this majoritarianism. Mitchell L. Gordon, Jury Learning: Integrating 

Dissenting Voices into Machine Learning Models , 115 CHI '22: PROCEEDINGS OF THE 2022 CHI CONFERENCE ON 

HUMAN FACTORS IN COMPUTING SYSTEMS 1, 2 (2022).  

> 121

Constitution of the United States (1787), NATIONAL ARCHIVES (Sep. 20, 2022), 

https://www.archives.gov/milestone -documents/constitution.  

> 122

Sandipan Kundu et al., Specific versus General Principles for Constitutional AI , AR XIV 12 (Oct. 20, 2023), 

https://arxiv.org/pdf/2310.13798.pdf. The analogy to Asimov’s Zeroth Law of Robotics is an interesting one, reality 

converging on science fiction. See Peter W. Singer, Isaac Asimov’s Laws of Robotics Are Wrong , BROOKINGS (May 

18, 2009), https://www.brookings.edu/articles/isaac -asimovs -laws -of -robotics -are -wrong/ (listing Asimov’s Laws 

and also usefully illustrating how quickly technology can advance and how seemingly well -supported beliefs about 

it often turn out to be po orly founded).  

> 123

Kundu et al., supra note 112 at 24.  

> 124

Id. 

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4800894 20 

that its behavior can be observed and evaluated. 125 As I will argue below, 126 this problem of 

vagueness is actually intrinsic to all rule - or principle -based approaches to guiding future behavior. 

What is gained in general applicability might be lost in transparency because the principle becomes 

vague and its actual application unpredictable. Nevertheless, Constitutional AI and similar 

approaches might point to a useful way forward for alignment that is scalable and democratic. 

C. Case -based reasoning 

Another recently proposed approach for moving beyond simple RLHF is the “case law” 

approach, put forward by a team from the University of Washington and funded by OpenAI. 127 

Drawing explicitly on jurisprudence and the common law, as well as the use of case -based 

reasoning (CBR) in moral philosophy, 128 these researchers argue that cases provide a better 

foundation for alignment than does either RLHF or the principles of Constitutional AI because 

CBR allows for a kind of negotiated convergence on a set of specific reflective equilibria, focusing 

on agree ment in particular cases even where getting to consensus on broader principles and their 

meaning and application would be difficult. 129 In particular, this approach intends to allow for a 

more pluralistic mode of AI alignment, where agreements on particular case and abstraction of the 

patterns of those agreement could create a more granular and flexible kind of alignment , rather 

than relying on rule by the principles laid down by an AI company or by the majority of those 

involved in an alignment deliberation .130 

As of this writing, the CBR approach has not been used to train or align an LLM, though 

the researchers developing CBR alignment intend to use it to do so .131 In short, the CBR approach 

seeks to build a repository of cases addressing various legal and ethical issues that can be used to 

guide how an AI will respond to novel situations presented to it, much like how lawyers reason 

about novel cases with reference to precedent. 132 In their foundational work, the CBR team first 

collected a set of seed cases involving legal questions from the subreddit r/legaladvice and existing 

case studies and then had experts in law evaluate the application of a set of potential AI responses 

to those questions, eliciting “key dimensions,” like the location of the user, the involvement of 

vulnerable parties, and the nature of the matter, that influenced how the experts thought about the                                

> 125 Id. at 24 –25.
> 126 See infra Part III.
> 127 Chen et al., supra note 82; Feng et al., supra note 12 at 1. Since the writing of this paper, I have begun
> collaborating with this team to improve case -based reasoning alignment. However, it mostly describes the work that
> this team was doing prior to our collaboration, which is ongoing and will be the subject of later work.
> 128 Feng et al., supra note 12 at 5 –6.
> 129 Id. at 6.
> 130 There are close analogies here to the concept of incompletely theorized agreements, see Sunstein, supra note 50
> at 1735 –36, which I will expand on later in the paper. See infra at Part II Section C.
> 131 Chen et al., supra note 82.
> 132 Feng et al., supra note 12 at 2.
> Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4800894

21 

different responses to the case that were proposed by the researchers. 133 For example, the team 

found a case on r/legaladvice about writing a legal strategy for a mobile game company. 134 They 

then created five response templates that could be used by an AI in responding to the case, ranging 

from warning that the case was a violation of content policy to giving a specific response with 

facts. 135 They presented these cases and responses to experts, who discussed why they preferred 

some AI response over the others and what would have changed their preference, for example 

information that many of the users were minors. These discussions were used to generate the expert 

key dimensions. 136 In the next step of CBR, the team used a large language model and the elicited 

expert dimensions to create a case repository by modifying the seed cases according to the 

dimensions that the experts had suggested. 137 Thus, a seed case might contain a situation in which 

the experts indicated the age of a particular person matters, so the model generates a set of new 

cases like the seed except that the age of that person is varied across them. 138 Finally, the 

researchers asked members of the public to evaluate the new synthetic cases for their 

appropriateness in the set and then to judge the quality of an AI’s responses to the new cases. 139 

The next step that the researchers envision is to use the case repository as a kind of flexible 

grounding for alignment, one that provides a more detailed bed from which models are able to 

extrapolate for their new outputs. 140 

The main benefit of the case -based approach is that it allows for a kind of alignment by 

detailed example, theoretically providing a more specific way of guiding the behavior of the AI. 

Rather than relying on a model knowing what some principle means in an abstract sense (a 

weakness of Constitutional AI) and then applying that principle to a new case in a way that is 

difficult to predict ahead of ti me, using a set of cases that have some particular common dimensions 

might get the AI to extrapolate based on those common dimensions. The underlying theory for this 

approach draws on common law reasoning but perhaps most directly on Sunstein’s arguments for 

analogical reasoning as the basis for legal argumentation. 141 Take the following example 

comparing Constitutional and CBR models: A Constitutional model is given a set of principles 

including principles of justice and fairness, but justice and fairness are not given any more context                                           

> 133 Id. at 2 –3.
> 134 Chen et al., supra note 82.
> 135 Id.
> 136 Id.
> 137 Feng et al., supra note 12 at 3 –4.
> 138 Chen et al., supra note 82.
> 139 Feng et al., supra note 12 at 4.
> 140 Chen et al., supra note 82.
> 141 The CBR team cites Sunstein in its related work section. Id. at 5 (citing Cass R. Sunstein, LEGAL REASONING AND
> POLITICAL CONFLICT (2d ed. 2018)). Though their citation does not include page numbers, it is likely that they are
> drawing on chapter three of that book, “Analogical Reasoning,” which is an update of earlier, foundational work
> primarily found in two essays in the Harvard La w Review. See Cass R. Sunstein, On Analogical Reasoning , 106
> HARV .L. REV .741 (1993); Cass R. Sunstein, Incompletely Theorized Agreements , 108 HARV .L. REV .1733 (1994).
> Sunstein himself has indicated that chapter three of Legal Reasoning and Political Conflict is an update of “On
> Analogical Reasoning” in yet another version of that paper, this one found on SSRN. Cass R. Sunstein, Analogical
> Reasoning ,SSRN n. * (2021), https://ssrn.com/abstract=3938546.
> Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4800894

22 

than what the AI already knows them to roughly mean based on the uses of those words in its 

underlying dataset. A CBR model is given a set of cases (which we can call precedents) that 

illustrate just and fair decisions across a range of situations. Both mo dels are given some new case 

that presents a problem and are told to render a decision (perhaps explicitly based on grounds of 

justice and fairness but perhaps not). The Constitutional AI model simply applies what it thinks 

those values mean and comes out with some response that apparently uses that implicit 

understanding to shape the output. The CBR model instead evaluates what is just and fair about 

the set of cases that it has been given and then, finding some pattern of those values in those cases, 

appl ies that pattern to the case in front of it. It is true that the CBR model is also using an underlying 

understanding of justice and fairness to guide its evaluation of the example cases, but like a lawyer 

who knows the meaning of the words in a statute but seeks clarification in examples in the caselaw, 

the CBR model gets a better sense through looking at uses. Both approaches may yield just and 

fair outcomes, but the idea behind CBR is that the outcome will be more predictable because the 

values will have been given specific content by virtue of the examples of their application, content 

that the creators of the model and the case repository will better understand, having selected the 

modes of extrapolation. 142 

II. Jurisprudential theories of interpretation and specification 

Alignment and jurisprudence are trying to solve many of the same fundamental problems. 

Each seeks to govern the behavior of powerful decisionmakers, whether AIs or judges, by creating 

frameworks and rules of decision that can explain and constrain the conduct of those entities. They 

also use similar tools to try to specify how the se decisionmakers should behave in new contexts 

by creating machineries of interpretation that can be consistently applied across contexts .

Crucially, both fields are concerned with governing in to the future, extrapolating into novel 

situations but using tools of experience and precedent that are retrospective. Rules written now 

must allow for the predictable development of patterns of decision while avoiding problems with 

edge cases that were not foreseen at the time that the systems were built. As Hart wrote long ago, 

when we seek to regulate the future, we face two handicaps: “The first handicap is our relative 

ignorance of fact; the second is our relative indeterminacy of aim.” 143 As I have just explained, 144 

alignment researchers have begun developing solutions to these difficult problems. Legal theorists 

have answers too. 

In this Section, I explore two prominent jurisprudential frameworks with an eye toward 

applying them to the alignment techniques discussed above. Similarities between their structure 

and application and the structure of alignment render them useful analog s and point to ways to           

> 142 As Sunstein argues, one of the main benefits of analogical reasoning based on precedents is that it “introduces a
> degree of stability and predictability” into the law. Sunstein, supra note 44 at 783.
> 143 Hart, supra note 1at 128.
> 144 See supra Part I.
> Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4800894

23 

cross the divide between law and AI. Simplifying things , Dworkin’s interpretivism seeks to put 

principles into law like Constitutional AI seeks to use principles as the basis for alignment. And ,

while Sunstein’s analogical reasoning has already informed the CBR alignment approach’s use of 

cases as example, there are more insights from his work that could substantially improve how that 

kind of thinking is being done in the context of AI. Together, Dworkin and Sunstein provide useful 

paradigms of rules and examples, the two tools of specification used by the law, and their 

interaction points toward a combined approach that can improve alignment. 

Before diving into Dworkin and Sunstein, it is worth briefly discussing the contributions 

made by H.L.A. Hart , whose positivism is still the dominant thread of jurisprudence in common 

law legal theory, 145 to which both Dworkin and Sunstein are responding. 146 In short, in Hart’s view, 

law is created by the expression of a group or person that has been recognized by a set of social 

conventions as being the valid lawmaker in that society. 147 The meaning of these positive 

statements of law arises from the social practices of those who act according to their 

understandings of the meaning of the statements. In societies in which constitutions and statutes 

(or even cases) pronounced by recognized authorities are the sources of law, where such law exists  

> 145

Though it is difficult to show conclusively that one jurisprudential perspective is dominant over alternatives, it is 

instructive to look to some recent points of agreement and conflict in the legal profession that raised questions of 

jurisprudence to see how deeply rooted positivism is. First, textualism and originalism, both arguably subspecies of 

positivism, see Frank H. Easterbrook, Textualism and the Dead Hand , 66 GEO . WASH . L. REV . 1119, 1119 (1998) 

(discussing textualism as a form of positivism); William Baude, Is Originalism Our Law? , 115 COLUM . L. REV .

2349, 2352 (2015) (same for originalism), are the dominant modes of legal interpretation in the Supreme Court, as 

evinced by agreement across the bench. Justice Kagan famously said that “we’re all textualists now,” see Harvard 

Law School, The 2015 Scalia Lecture Series: A Dialogue with Justice Elena Kagan on the Reading of Statutes ,

YOU TUBE , at 08:29 (Nov. 25, 2015), https://youtu.be/dpEtszFT0Tg. She has also said “we are all originalists,” Clip: 

Kagan Confirmation Hearing, Day 2, Part 1 (C -SPAN television broadcast June 29, 2010), http://www.c -

span.org/video/?c2924010/clip -kagan -confirmatio n-hearing -day -2-part -1. Justice Jackson has also expressed 

approval of the two modes of interpretation. See Mark Joseph Stern, Ketanji Brown Jackson Has Perfected the Art of 

Originalism Jujitsu , SLATE (Jul. 28, 2023), https://slate.com/news -and -politics/2023/07/supreme -court -ketanji -

brown -jackson -originalism -jujitsu.html. The conservatives have all embraced textualism, at least in their statements. 

See Kevin Tobia, We’re Not All Textualists Now , NYU ANN . SURV . AM. L. 243, 245 (2023) (citing various approving 

mentions of Kagan’s “we’re all textualists now” by the conservative members of the Supreme Court). Originalism is 

so deeply engrained in the conservative wing that Justice Alito expressed some resentment that Jus tice Kagan had 

claimed it for her use. See Adam Liptak, Justice Jackson Joins the Supreme Court, and the Debate Over 

Originalism , N.Y. TIMES (Oct. 10, 2022), https://www.nytimes.com/2022/10/10/us/politics/jackson -alito -kagan -

supreme -court -originalism.html (reporting on a speech by Justice Alito in which he criticized Justice Kagan for 

invoking originalism but voting in favor of same -sex marria ge in Obergefell v. Hodges ). On the other hand, attempts 

to bring back a kind of interpretivism, as most recently through Adrian Vermeule’s controversial argument for 

Common Good Constitutionalism, ADRIAN VERMEULE , COMMON GOOD CONSTITUTIONALISM 4–7 (2022), have run 

into a buzzsaw of criticism, even from those who might share some of Vermeule’s political goals. See, e.g. , William 

Baude & Stephen E. Sachs, The “Common -Good” Manifesto , 136 HARV . L. REV . 861 (2023) (absolutely laying into 

the book). See also , Leslie Green & Thomas Adams, Legal Positivism , STAN . ENCYC . PHIL . (Dec. 17, 2019), (noting 

that “[positivism] is probably the dominant view among analytically inclined philosophers of law”).  

> 146

Though note that Sunstein is probably developing a kind of positivism in his work on analogical reasoning (with 

some exceptions) while Dworkin is critiquing positivism.  

> 147

Hart, supra note 1 at 94 –95. 

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4800894 24 

the role of a judge deciding a novel case is not to make the law but rather to apply it. 148 In this 

view, the core task of adjudication is the interpretation of existing laws in light of the new situation. 

Such an interpretation takes the new situation within the bounds of the law and demonstrates a 

way in which the meaning of the law can be understood in this new context. 

But what to do when a judge is confronted with a new situation in which there is little or 

no law or when existing law is ambiguous as to what application would be best ? Hart argues that 

such situations are inevitable in laws that use natural languages; in his terms, the se languages are 

“irreducibly open textured.” 149 For Hart, laws can be thought of as providing central examples that 

resolve the essential core questions of a dispute, while hard questions of ambiguity exist at the 

“fringe of vagueness” 150 of language . In these circumstances of true ambiguity, judges must make 

“a fresh choice between open alternatives” 151 based on certain “social aims.” 152 Thus, where the 

“plain meaning” of a rule is clear, it should be applied, 153 but the nature of language is such that 

some discretion is inevitable 154 and actually salutary for judges in applying rules to edge cases. 155 

Because fallible humans legislating in a complex world cannot foresee all fact situations that might 

emerge in the future and also have different aims at different times, the open texture of language 

and its limitations on complete specification of meaning allow for flexibility and creativity in 

deciding novel questions in the future. 156 

For Hart, the law takes the structure and form of general rules. 157 Often these are expressed 

as statutes, but cases arising out of concrete disputes can also announce general rules (as many 

great constitutional cases do, for example) even if usually specific cases seem to operate more to 

illustrate existing general rules than to create new ones. One can think of this approach as a kind 

of sketching out of the map of meaning of a rule. Hart argued that in many rules there is a central 

core of clear meaning surrounded by vague peripheries of uncertain meanings and observed that, 

while most practical interpretations of the rule occur in the clear center, the legal ly contentious 

cases often involve the edge cases where the correct interpretation of the rule is not clear (which 

is why they created enough disagreement to require going to court). These edge cases are resolved 

by judges applying the rule to this difficult new situation and establishing a particular interpretation 

of it in light of the relevant facts. In a system of precedent, these interpretations accumulate and 

the rule’s meaning gets fleshed out over time such that when a new question ar ises it can be de cided                         

> 148 Id. at 29 –30. Hart makes the instructive analogy of a “scorer” in a game who applies the scoring rule without
> making that rule. Id. at 139 –40.
> 149 Id. at 128.
> 150 Id. at 120.
> 151 Id. at 125.
> 152 Id. at 127.
> 153 Id. at 141.
> 154 Id. at 123.
> 155 Id. at 127 –28 (arguing that a degree of judicial discretion is necessary to overcome the impossibility of full ex
> ante specification of what to do in future circumstances).
> 156 Id. at 130.
> 157 Id. at 133.
> Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4800894

25 

in light of the collective meaning of the rule established by analogy and distinction from existing 

precedents. 158 

As we will see, Sunstein modifies this approach, arguing that it is the precedents that are 

the key and not the general rules at all .159 But both Hart and Sunstein agree that the meaning of 

rules derives from the ways in which they are interpreted in different contexts, and that meaning 

comes into the system from the accumulation of these interpretations. Positive statements of law 

and practical, social interpretations of those statements form the ground of what the law is against 

the backdrop of the power and limitations of natural language understanding. 160 It is here that 

Dworkin’s main disagreement comes in. 161 

A. Interpretivism and the value of values 

Ronald Dworkin, the foremost proponent of interpretivism, disagreed that morality was 

separable from law and, 162 crucially for our purposes, argued that values were necessary to make 

sense of language. 163 He viewed the legal system as operating within the context of, and informed 

by, moral principles that should guide how judges make decisions .164 These moral principles are 

in some part abstract and in some part rooted in the political morality of the community of which  

> 158

Id. at 134. Hart admits that precedents can be interpreted and applied in different ways by different judges, 

making even this kind of specification by example an incomplete answer to the problem of how to communicate the 

meaning of rules.  

> 159

See infra Part II Section B.  

> 160

Id. at 249.  

> 161

See infra Part II Section A.  

> 162

The debate over the separability thesis was hugely significant between these thinkers but is less relevant for our 

purposes here. However, it is interesting to think about the extent to which alignment is a kind of inculcation of 

morality in an AI, especi ally given the roots parts of alignment research in moral theory. See Gabriel, supra note 14 

at 412. Cf . LAWRENCE LESSIG , CODE 87 –88 (1999) (enumerating four external forces (law, norms, markets, and 

architectures) that act on the object of regulation to get them to act in compliance with the society’s regulations). 

Alignment techniques resemble these kinds of external imposition s but also resemble a kind of education of the AI, 

in which it is given a kind of internal morality or way of looking at the world. The final model will have already 

been trained and subjected to alignment by the time that is becomes “conscious” of the wor ld, so it seems unlikely 

that it could even be aware of the fact that it was aligned to human values, while the object of regulation in Lessig’s 

picture is certainly aware that she is being subjected to external forces. This discussion has perhaps gone too far in 

anthropomorphizing the AI models, but it is interesting to consider what kinds of things we are doing to these 

models and how to think about them.  

> 163

Dworkin, supra note 3 at 1 (writing that “[t]here is inevitably a moral dimension to an action at law”). His 

discussion of courtesy illustrates the moral dimension of linguistic interpretation. Dworkin argued that practices like 

interpreting language requ ire referring to underlying values that make sense of changes in those practices over time. 

Hart gives the example of a man who tries to teach his son to take off his hat before entering church by providing the 

example of doing so himself, and argues that the example is insufficient because it is unclear from the mere act what 

features of it to copy. Hart, supra note 1 at 121 –23 (though he begins by summarizing the views of others, it is also 

his own view that examples are insufficient without rules to guide their interpretation). For Dworkin, also giving the 

example of doffing hats, the source of meaning of the practic e is in the value, courtesy, that it serves, and each 

participant in the social practice that serves the value must decide what it requires both for herself and for the 

community. Dworkin, supra note 3 at 63 –64. Thus, a practice becomes meaningful insofar as it serves the value, not 

to the extent to which it corresponds to an announced rule.  

> 164

Id. at 3. 

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4800894 26 

the judge is a part, 165 but regardless they are there, and the law must engage with them because 

they form the ground of inevitable theoretical disagreements about the meaning and nature of the 

law. 166 As Dworkin argued evocatively, theories that hold that the law includes only disagreements 

about the semantic content of words as used in everyday life makes legal arguments “pointless in 

the most trivial and irritating way, like an argument about banks when one person has in mind 

savings banks and the other riverbanks.” 167 Instead, in his view, many arguments in law are about 

whether and to what extent specific positive laws meaningfully serve underlying values, which 

give content and purpose to those laws. 168 For Dworkin, the interpretation of a statement of law is 

impossible or meaningless unless done against the backdrop of a higher value that can inform how 

that interpretation is done. 

To briefly summarize his theory, Dworkin believed that good legal decisions require the 

satisfaction of two criteria: first, that they “fit” with the overall system of the law in the context of 

which they are decided and second that they put that system in the “best light” possible, or “justify” 

it according to principles like integrity, justice, and fairness. 169 In Dworkin’s view, “the law is 

structured by a coherent set of principles about justice and fairness and procedural due process, 

and it asks [judges] to enforce these in the fresh cases that come before them.” 170 

In practice, these two criteria require a multi -step process. A judge is presented with a case. 

First, she must come up with a set of theories for holdings that could resolve the case before her 

and then check those theories against the precedent cases that form the content of the law of the 

area at issue. 171 Theories that do not match most of the most important cases are thrown out. 172 

Developing this set is the first part of fit, the requirement that the new decision accord with the 

old. But this is not simple statistical best fit like we might see in machine learning: for Dworkin, 

morality operates here too, and theories generated by the judge must both match the precedents 

and “state a principle of justice” that is connected to some “more general moral or political 

consideration.” 173 In this way, the judge is already unlike a n AI model simply trying to fit to all of 

the data that it is given. Next, the judge must expand the range of fit, looking to “the great network 

of political structures and decisions of [her] community” and aiming with the candidate theories 

to “justify[] the network as a whole.” 174                    

> 165 Id. at 249 –50 (discussing how an ideal judge should behave in a situation in which abstract justice and political
> fairness pull in different directions in resolving a case).
> 166 Id. at 45 –46.
> 167 Id. at 44.
> 168 Id. at 47 –48.
> 169 Id. at 239.
> 170 Id. at 243.
> 171 Id. at 240 –42.
> 172 Id. at 242.
> 173 Id .
> 174 Id. at 245.
> Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4800894

27 

Whatever candidate theories survive the fit step are subjected to the “best light” test, in 

which the judge decides which interpretation “shows the legal record to be the best it can be from 

the standpoint of substantive political morality.” 175 This substantive political morality is made up 

of “abstract justice,” apparently based on the judge’s own sense of that, and “political fairness,” 

the views of the political community of which the judge is a part. 176 Where these two components 

conflict, the judge must decide herself which to prefer, subject to an individualized higher -level 

sense of how the two interact in different legal contexts. 177 It is not clear whether a Dworkinian 

legal system staffed exclusively by Herculeses would be one in which the mechanisms of this 

balancing led to consistent applications of the law across contexts, but it seems likely that the 

ingredient of political fairness would lend it a de gree of flexibility in its application. However, the 

Dworkinian structure of fit and best light and the idea that a higher -level sense of the balance 

between fairness and justice should structure adjudication lends Dworkinian interpretation a kind 

of “secondary rule” that gives it consistency. These structures operate as a set of meta -rules, 

creating a hierarchy of sources or process through which interpretation should happen. 

As Dworkin summarizes his theory, fit “will provide a rough threshold requirement that an 

interpretation . . . . must meet if it is to be eligible at all.” 178 Then, to decide among the surviving 

interpretations, the judge “ask[s] which shows the community’s structure of institutions and 

decisions . . . . in a better light from the standpoint of political morality.” 179 Importantly, the moral 

aspects influence how the words in the law should be interpreted, guiding the decisionmaker to a 

certain part of the space of meanings that could exist for any given word such that their ultimate 

decision at the level of language is shaped by morality. For Dworkin, one of the overarching goals 

of the law is integrity, which consists of the process of bringing the law into some kind of coherent 

picture that makes each of the elements of that picture the best that they can be. 180 The law is a 

system that is motivated by higher goals in service of the good of the political community, and the 

judge’s role is to decide in ways that move toward the accomplishment of that objective in each 

case they adjudicate. Dworkin’s vision is fund amentally a moral one, and it is through the 

application of high -level principles of political morality like justice and fairness 181 to the facts of 

specific cases that a system of law is justified and made legitimate. 

B. Analogies and incompletely theorized agreements                    

> 175 Id. at 248. Because interpretations that do not have any relationship to political morality are eliminated at the fit
> step, all remaining interpretations can be evaluated according to whether they put the law in its best moral light.
> 176 Id. at 249.
> 177 Id. at 250.
> 178 Id. at 255.
> 179 Id. at 256.
> 180 Id. at 225.
> 181 In his later work, Dworkin argued for the unity of value, that these concepts are the same or at least mutually
> supporting, see RONALD DWORKIN ,JUSTICE FOR HEDGEHOGS 1 (2011), but he makes a distinction in his work most
> directly relevant to our subject.
> Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4800894

28 

Contra Dworkin, Sunstein argues that general principles of abstract political morality 

provide a poor ground for legal reasoning. Instead, for Sunstein, the ground of the law is in concrete 

precedent, and though the moral views of individual people may inf orm how the law is made, the 

form of reasoning that lawyers and judges distinctively engage in is analogical reasoning 182 —

which may lead the law away from what is morally legitimate 183 —not philosophy. 184 Both 

Sunstein and Dworkin agree that the law is composed of a set of fixed points, laws and cases that 

derive from our considered judgments about the world, 185 that form the basis for reasoning. 

Dworkin thinks that these fixed points are particularly important precedents that create a “fit” 

criterion, 186 or per Sunstein’s description, “constrain the category of permissible general 

theories,” 187 but that the law must ultimately be interpreted in light of general moral ends expressed 

as principles. Sunstein is skeptical of the possibility of general theorizing altogether and argues 

that analogical reasoning, and thus the law, ends “at just the point when the relevant principles go 

beyond a low level of gen erality.” 188 

The two authors’ examples of legal reasoning provided in their works instructively 

underline the difference s in their approaches. Dworkin insists that judges start with theories: 

“[Hercules, the ideal judge,] begins by setting out various candidates for the best interpretation of 

the precedent cases even before he reads them.” 189 Only then should the judge see how the 

precedents fit to the theories that the judge has independently generated. 190 Sunstein also begins 

with an asserted proposition, which he calls “low -level,” 191 and then immediately makes sense of 

the proposition by analogizing its content to precedent. 192 Importantly, these approaches diverge 

not just on prioritization but on where they find the source of meaning for language. For Sunstein, 

a sentence does not make sense except insofar as we can place it in our mental context through 

analogization. The wor d “vehicle” 193 is just a sound until tied to a representation with particular 

features, and new stimuli are categorized as “vehicle” or “non -vehicle” based on the extent to                                                   

> 182 Sunstein, supra note 44 at 741 –42.
> 183 Id. at 759.
> 184 In his article On Analogical Reasoning , Sunstein specifically calls out Dworkin’s approach for being inconsistent
> with actual legal practice, in which lawyers do not engage in “general moral theorizing” but seek to address cases by
> reasoning analogically. Id. at 784 –85.
> 185 Id. at 751.
> 186 Dworkin, supra note 3 at 238 –39.
> 187 Sunstein, supra note 44 at 753 (citing Brown v. Board of Education, 347 U.S. 483, Roe v. Wade, 410 U.S. 113,
> and affirmative action as examples). Obviously, Roe has turned out not to be a fixed point that constrains subsequent
> decisions.
> 188 Id. at 754. Here, Sunstein seems implicitly to be asserting a version of the separability thesis. See generally ,
> H.L.A. Hart, Positivism and the Separation of Law and Morals , 71 HARV .L. REV .593 (1957).
> 189 Dworkin, supra note 3at 240.
> 190 Id.
> 191 Sunstein, supra note 58 at 759.
> 192 Id. at 760.
> 193 See Hart, supra note 1at 123 ; for a more complete treatment of this example, see H.L.A. Hart, Positivism and the
> Separation of Law and Morals , 71 HARV .L. REV . 593, 607 (1958).
> Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4800894

29 

which they resemble, or are analogizable to, the representation that we have. 194 In the law, 

precedents function as this kind of representation, providing categories that can make sense of the 

words in new statutes and cases. 195 For Dworkin, in contrast, the meaning of important legal words 

or practices must be understood with reference to values that underpin and justify them. As his 

example of courtesy shows, it is not sufficient to simply provide a set of examples of people be ing 

courteous to know what courtesy means because in a different context different (indeed contrary) 

practices could be understood to be courteous. 196 Instead, in Dworkin’s view, disagreements about 

what words or practices to use emerge from real, theoretical disagreements about the deeper nature 

of the values of a particular community as it expresses itself. The words of a law should be read in 

light o f the values of those who live in the community rather than in light of past interpretations 

of the law’s constituent sentences’ semantics. The meaning of a particular practice of courtesy, 

then, depends on the meaning of the principle itself and not on how it fits in with past practices. 

Hart, Dworkin, and Sunstein are all writing in the shadow of Wittgenstein, following his arguments 

that meaning emerges from the interaction of people in a community. 197 They diverge on where 

and how that meaning emerges. 

Beyond the descriptive arguments, for Sunstein there is a normative value to analogical 

reasoning as much as it is also to him a more accurate descriptive picture of how lawyers proceed .

Sunstein argues that coming to agreement on general theories is nearly impossible and largely 

inconsistent with the goal of creating a pluralistic society in which people of different perspectives 

can live together. 198 As Sunstein writes, analogical reasoning consists of lawyers “develop[ing] 

low -level principles to account for particular judgments, and apply[ing] those low -level principles 

to new cases in which there is as yet no judgment at all.” 199 These low -level principles then become 

concretized over time, taking on the status of precedent as they are accepted by society. 200 The law 

is the mechanism of analogical reasoning on which Sunstein focuses, but it seems reasonable that 

an even more broadly democratic or pluralistic mechanism of deliberation could be developed that 

extended these benefits. People reason analogically all the time, and often ues this reasoning 

process to come to agreement on practical questions of daily life. The key benefit of analogical 

reasoning is that, because of its proximity to life in the world, it can specify things in the world 

more clearly than through general rules. Sunstein’s theory concentrates on concrete particulars and                                              

> 194 Debates in psychology over whether these representations are defined by statements of collections of relevant
> concepts or simply sets of examples of those concepts are ongoing, and seem to closely track the differences
> between Hart, who thinks of cases as subordinate to rules, and Sunstein, who puts cases first. See Gregory L.
> Murphy, Is there an exemplar theory of concepts? , 23 PSYCHONOMIC .BULL .REV .1035, 1035 (2016).
> 195 Hart argued similarly that sentences of law could be understood as having core, relatively uncontested meanings
> in the form of similar examples repeated across contexts. Hart, supra , note 1at 123 –24.
> 196 See Dworkin, supra note 3at 47 –49.
> 197 And indeed, they all cite him in the works being analyzed here. See, e.g. , Hart, supra note 1at 297 n. 125 (citing
> Wittgenstein’s Philosophical Investigations ); Dworkin, supra note 3at 63 (same); Sunstein, supra note 58 at 753 n.
> 43 (same).
> 198 Sunstein, supra note 5 9at 1735.
> 199 Sunstein, supra note 58 at 758.
> 200 Id. at 771.
> Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4800894

30 

the process by which those particulars can be made to stand in relation to each other, to cohere. 201 

Analogical reasoning is that process. 202 

Overlaying, and resulting from, the process of analogical reasoning is a set of 

“incompletely theorized agreements,” that participants in the legal reasoning process come to 

about the outcomes of cases without ever having to agree on the deeper reasons behind particular 

decisions. 203 As Sunstein writes, these participants “agree on the result and on relatively narrow or 

low -level explanations for it. They need not agree on fundamental principle. They do not offer 

larger or more abstract explanations than are necessary to decide the ca se.” 204 This specificity is 

one of the great strengths of legal reasoning, in Sunstein’s view. Because legal reasoning does not 

rely on coming to agreements about higher principles like morality and the greater good, people 

with different values can still accept specific outcomes of the law even if they would have come 

to those outcomes by different paths. Thus, analogy provides the mechanism to reach incompletely 

theorized agreements, which then provide the content of the law. A Sunsteinian judge also does 

someth ing like fit, but rather than reaching for a principle like justice to evaluate the candidate 

theories that survive that process, she remains at a lower level, deciding this case like others have 

been decided. 

Two immediate objections to Sunstein’s arguments rear their head. First, while it may be 

true that analogical reasoning is a particular characteristic of legal argumentation, it is not clear 

what analogies are made of. Sunstein anticipates this critique an d explains it in depth, writing that 

because “[e]verything is similar in infinite ways to everything else, and also different from 

everything else in the same number of ways,” “one needs a theory of relevant similarities and 

differences.” 205 Because analogical reasoning cannot provide this from itself, “[i]t is thus 

dependent on an apparatus that it is unable to produce . . . . At the very least one needs a set of 

criteria to engage in analogical reasoning. Otherwise one has no idea what is a nalogous to what.” 206 

But he also has answers. First, Sunstein argues that general theories are also unsatisfactory, too 

inflexible to provide a full account of how to balance the various desired goods that may be traded 

off through different ultimate decisions. 207 More deeply, however, Sunstein believes that low -level 

convictions about individual cases reached through analogical reasoning deserve priority over 

general principles, and that “there may be no criteria for truth in law except for our considered 

judgment s about particular cases, once those judgments have been made to cohere with each                     

> 201 Id. at 775 –76
> 202 Id. at 775.
> 203 Sunstein, supra note 5 9at 1735 –36.
> 204 Id.
> 205 Sunstein, supra note 58 at 774.
> 206 Id . It is instructive to note that this feature of analogical reasoning was also pointed out by Hart, who wrote that
> judges can never exhaust the various dimensions of distinction that might exist among precedents so as to come to a
> fully specified new decision .Hart, supra note 1 at 134 -35.
> 207 Id. at 776.
> Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4800894

31 

other.” 208 Further, “coherence in law might then be defined as consistency among particular 

judgments and low -level principles,” 209 which are tested over time with reference to other low -

level and high -level principles. 210 On this view, analogical principles take a kind of canonical status 

over time as they are enmeshed in a framework of other principles and fixed points, taking meaning 

from their presence within and among those existing structures. The law is just these pr inciples, 

and the content of political morality emerges from the network of them. Low -level principles 

emerge from the network of precedents itself, bootstrapping a system into existence. Because 

people already know what words basically mean and can apparently reason analogically without 

having been trained to do so, they can build such a system. In later work, Sunstein concedes that 

this answer does not fully resolve the problem of how to decide among infinite possible analogies, 

but he does believe that analogy remains the essential engine of the law even if some theory is 

necessary. 211 

Second, a critic might argue that without a general principle to determine what kind of 

analogy is a good one, it is impossible to determine whether a given analogy is just or should be 

used. In other words, in precisely the hard cases where the statement at issue is most ambiguous 

or dissimilar to precedent, analogical reasoning fails as a guide and the judge can pick whatever 

analogy they want . In his more Dworkinian moods, Sunstein concedes that it is necessary to find 

a high -level way of determining wha t kinds of analogies are the right ones to apply to new 

situations. 212 But he has two major responses to this kind of critique. First, Sunstein argues that 

this problem is a feature of general principle -based systems, and worse there. He gives the example 

of Holmes’s infamous opinion in Buck v. Bell ,213 the involuntary sterilization case, arguing that 

though Holmes did use analogy in support of finding that involuntary sterilizations could be 

mandated, he actually was reasoning from “a principle of a high level of generality,” the general 

public welfare, that was “not evaluated by reference to low - or intermediate -level principles that 

may also account for the analogous cases.” 214 For Sunstein, Holmes’s failure was that he was not 

reasoning in a constrained way, considering all relevant precedents, but rather reaching for a 

particular outcome because he preferred it on principle and then justifying it post hoc by means of 

analogical reasoning. Judges following general principles can operate in an unconstrained way 

because they can fashion arguments for the application of those principles in whatever way they 

want. 215 Analogical reasoning, if done correctly, helps constrain and guide the grounds of decision. 

Sunstein’s second major response is that low -level principles should be preferred to general 

principles because low -level convictions about specific cases “deserve priority in thinking about                      

> 208 Id. at 777.
> 209 Id.
> 210 Id. at 778.
> 211 See Sunstein, supra note 60 at 32.
> 212 Sunstein, supra note 60 at 31 –32.
> 213 274 U.S. 200 (1927).
> 214 Sunstein, supra note 58 at 757.
> 215 Id.
> Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4800894

32 

good outcomes in law.” 216 Because, as discussed above, coherence among considered judgments 

about particular cases is the only criterion for truth in law, 217 the law takes its force and meaning 

from the accumulation of principles and precedents that structure it. For Sunstein, it is the low -

level judgments that give meaning and content to legal reasoning and that provide the grounds of 

the law, not some refere nce to transcendent values. 

In short, Sunstein and Dworkin provide opposing theories of how meaning emerges in the 

law, though as we shall see their approaches are actually in many ways mutually supporting 

because theory requires application to give it meaning and analogy requires theory to give it 

structure. 218 Responsibly choosing a given part of the sets of meanings that a legal statement can 

plausibly have requires referring not just to the likelihood that a particular word was used in a 

particular way, but reading the language in light of the values and agreements, at whatever level, 

that actors in the community share. As such, a mixed a pproach or simultaneous seems to be best, 

meaning bootstrapping itself into existence from the background of existing language and the 

world, 219 principles and examples reinforcing each other through content and application. 

III. Alignment as jurisprudence 

The isomorphism of alignment and the law means that the legal theories outlined above 

can aid alignment researchers in identifying problems of alignment and the solutions to them. In 

particular, legal theory offers solutions to the problems of representation and specification that 

alignment techniques currently face. Existing alignment techniques are either unrepresentative or 

majoritarian, using principles and values either thought up by small groups in AI labs or 

representing the s imple majority views of small polled populations and applying them in ways that 

exclude alternative perspectives . In either case, the diverse views and values represented in society 

are not represented in alignment, and as AI models take on increasing powe r and responsibilities, 

if minority views remain unrepresented then they may be crushed by the operations of AIs that 

operate in ways contrary to them . Even if a path to a more pluralist form of alignment is found, 

existing techniques are relatively unable to specify the content of the principles or policies that are 

put into models. Currently, these principles are expressed as general statements of rul es, but the 

ambiguity and contextuality of natural language makes the application of these rules uncertain and 

difficult for researchers to guide with any degree of granularity. Simple statements that models 

should be “helpful” or “fair” leave the interpretation of those principles up to the models based on 

their underlying understanding of the words in the principle and risk having the model interpret 

the principles in ways contrary to the intent of aligners or what is best for society. The law has          

> 216 Id. at 777.
> 217 Id.
> 218 As Sunstein ultimately concluded. Sunstein, supra note 60 at 31 –32.
> 219 As a large language model uses the underlying background of its training on language to generate a set of
> representations of the world before scoping in on their relationships to generate particular outputs.
> Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4800894

33 

solutions to these problems. Each of the legal theorists discussed in the previous Part sought 

answers to the specification problem, arguing that different sources of meaning could be used to 

specify the content of rules in their practical applications, and that through the use of precedent 

these applications could accumulate to create a network of past poi nts into which new 

interpretations can be fit. Each of them also emphasized the importance of providing ways for the 

political community subject to the decisions of judges to be reflected in the reasoning process of 

those judges, ensuring that their decisi ons were representative. Because the law and AI share the 

same shape, these theories can help answer how to resolve these key questions in alignment. 

As discussed, 220 in both the law and in AI a set of prior decisions provides data used by the 

judge or model to respond to some new input. In the legal system , the decisions, statutes, 

constitutions, and other documents that form the basis of legal reasoning are both substantive 

precedents that directly shape how the new case will be decided, in part by giving meaning to the 

underlying sources of law that the n ew decision will draw on, and are also examples of the kinds 

of reasoning that the legal system is built to do. Judges making new decisions thus reason in both 

the content and form of the system, extending it in their new opinion. The models of legal reasoning 

put forward by Hart, Dworkin , and Sunstein converge here, each of them emphasizing the role of 

precedent in binding the next decision into some relation, whether principled or analogical, with 

the former ones. For Hart and Sunstein, meaning arises from social practices and past 

interpretations, while for Dworkin background values are necessary to give legitimate meaning to 

applications or interpretations of the law. Foundation models get their examples and patterns of 

reasoning from their training data, a form of precedent in the use of language, and from particular 

examples made salient by finetuning. A huge amount of training data goes into each model and it 

learns the patterns that structure the data, from the likelihood of some word coming after another 

word or set of words 221 to working across modes of text, images, and sounds. 222 The model applies 

these patterns to each new input that comes before it like a judge extrapolating from precedent to 

decide a new case based on the facts and holdings of those cases. 223 Then, researchers seek to give 

the models substantive guidelines and constraints on what extrapolations they choose through the 

use of alignment techniques like those discussed above, 224 for example by pointing out specific 

cases to the AI and making them more salient in its reasoning process through the use of finetuning 

techniques like RLHF and its descendants , as well as through inference scaling and similar 

innovations .225 In a sense, finetuning points the model to the part of its underlying distribution or                    

> 220 See supra Section I Part A & Section II.
> 221 See Wolfram, supra note 7 at 2.
> 222 ChatGPT can now see, hear, and speak ,OPEN AI (Sep. 25, 2023), https://openai.com/blog/chatgpt -can -now -see -
> hear -and -speak.
> 223 Wolfram, supra note 7 at 1.
> 224 See supra Part I.
> 225 For example, one regularly suggested tip for using consumer models like ChatGPT is to “few -shot” it, to give it a
> few examples of the kind of reasoning that the user is asking for, in order to get it in the mode of that kind of
> reasoning before the user a sks the question that she is seeking to get an answer to. See Tom B. Brown et al.,
> Language Models are Few -Shot Learners ,AR XIV 4–5 (Jul. 22, 2020), https://arxiv.org/pdf/2005.14165.pdf
> Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4800894

34 

map of meaning that the researchers want the model to draw on. The training data provides a 

linguistic and conceptual background for reasoning and the finetuning process functions like the 

set of precedents on point, focusing the AI on a particular part of the conceptual space that is most 

relevant to its decision. This process is like the processes of interpretation through value or 

example that Dworkin and Sunstein put forward, using precedents and patterns of past 

interpretation to inform the meaning of ambiguous rules in new cases. 

These legal theories can help alignment with its problems of pluralism and specification. 

Below, I match Dworkinian interpretivism to Constitutional AI and Sunstein’s analogical 

reasoning to CBR, illustrating specific insights that can be drawn across from the law into 

alignment. Each of these concepts is far deeper and more complex than I have been able to cover 

in this short space but, in short, the problems of meaning specification that both alignment 

approaches are facing could be addressed by using legal concepts. Constitutional AI should try to 

incorporate a hierarchy of principles that are used to provide guides for the application of rules in 

specific contexts and generate those rules by reference to deliberation about cases, as Dworkin laid 

out in his framework of best light and fit .226 Creating a structure in which certain principles are 

elevated to a higher or legitimately “constitutional” level 227 and then having those principles 

inform the application of the lower principles would provide a guide for how to resolve questions 

of ambiguity in their application in the same way that higher values inform Dworkinian 

interpretation . Combining such a structure with a system of “fit” or precedent that allowed for 

specification of the meaning of the principles by filling in their open texture through examples of 

approved applications in edge cases, as Hart and Sunstein argued for, woul d deepen the extent to 

which the principles could be predictably applied in varying cases. Thus, for example, master 

concepts like justice, equality, or fairness 228 could be used to inform how subsidiary principles are 

applied in concrete cases and each application of those principles would ramify back into the 

system, providing greater definition. Because public reasoning about concrete cases would 

represent a core part of ho w the meaning of the values emerged, this system would be reasonably 

democratic. 

The CBR approach should similarly be modified to incorporate direct public reasoning 

about alignment and what approaches to it should be taken. Applying Sunstein’s insights, CBR 

should take a set of applications of AI in the world and then have people deliberate about whether 

those applications are the best ones for AI to be doing. Their decisions and their reasons for them 

could then be brought back into the system as fixed p oints that could be used to guide the actions                       

> (demonstrating that large language model performance can be improved by few -shot learning). For a discussion of
> inference scaling, see Yangzhen Wu et al., Inference Scaling Laws: An Empirical Analysis of Compute -Optimal
> Inference for Problem -Solving with Language Models ,AR XIV (Mar. 3, 2025), https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.00724.
> 226 Dworkin, supra note 3 at 256.
> 227 As opposed to the more “statutory” level of current Constitutional AI principles that all exist at the same level of
> importance.”
> 228 Insofar as they are distinct. See generally RONALD DWORKIN ,JUSTICE FOR HEDGEHOGS (2011); JOHN RAWLS ,A
> THEORY OF JUSTICE (1971).
> Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4800894

35 

of models in the future. Because LLMs can generate large quantities of varying text, they could be 

used to generate diverse cases for humans to deliberate about, and as the deliberation proceeded it 

could be used to influence what kinds of cases the models generated in future. Thus, once a fixed 

point about some AI action emerged, future cases that are in varying ways “like” that action could 

be presented to the users. However, this “likeness” should emerge simply from having the 

generative model iterate ac ross the possibility space rather than having experts define it. Over time, 

some sense of the relevant similarities and differences among these cases might emerge that could 

form the basis of further extrapolation. 

A combined approach would involve using CBR to specify the meaning of the principles 

that are used in Constitutional AI. This approach might actually be the most effective and easiest 

to introduce, as the existing Collective Constitutional AI deliberation platform could simpl y be 

modified to produce sample cases based on the principles that users select or write and then present 

those cases to the user for decision and analysis. Thus, users would be able to reason at a high level 

about principles and then s pecify what they mean by the principles through selecting applications 

that align with their idea about the meaning of cases. Cases that implicate multiple principles could 

be presented to other users who picked different of those principles, and where many users coming 

from different principles selecte d the same outcome, there would be an incompletely theorized 

agreement. Combining Dworkin and Sunstein in this way would allow for both more democratic 

and more effective specification of meaning in the align ment system and would likely not represent 

an overwhelming engineering burden. Empirical experiments among these applications are 

necessary to determine which of them would actually be successful in improving alignment, but 

they each represent a useful potential path forward. 

A. Interpretivism and Constitutional AI 

Constitutional AI resembles Dworkin’s theory of the law, and elements of Dworkin’s 

approach can help resolve some of the limitations of Constitutional AI’s current form. The 

conceptual similarity between the two approaches relatively clear , though there are some 

differences in how they operate and any cros s-application must be stylized . As discussed above, 

Dworkin’s “fit” maps onto the pretraining stage of making an AI model. In each version, the judge 

or AI consumes a set of training data and figures out the conceptual patterns underpinning that 

data. These patterns are then used to gr ound future decisions or completions. There are some 

differences between Dworkinian and statistical fit. Most importantly, Dworkin does not simply 

allow for every possible theory that explains most or the most important precedents to survive the 

fit stage. 229 Instead, he eliminates candidate interpretations that do not announce a plausible 

“principle of justice” and so fail to connect the caselaw to a “more general moral or political    

> 229 Dworkin, supra note 3 at 242 (eliminating the second of six candidate theories for resolving a sample case
> because it does not announce a principle of justice).
> Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4800894

36 

consideration.” 230 Under the “shovel everything in” approach to training LLMs, in contrast, pretty 

much all of the data that is available in the world is put into the model for it to fit to, 231 and the 

models do not seem to apply any moral or political considerations to evaluating their own training 

data at the pretraining stage. 232 While AI labs do seem to exclude some data on the basis that it 

contains objectionable content, 233 that is different from the internal application of principles by a 

model choosing how to understand the patterns that structure its pretraining data. Models are 

incapable of such operations on their own, especially during pretraining, and there are intere sting 

questions about what would happen if all sexist data, for example, were excluded from the 

pretraining process of a model, if such a thing were possible. 234 One potential Dworkinian 

improvement on the Constitutional AI approach would be to train a model to recognize racism or 

some other objectionable type of content and then have it go over training data, modifying it so as 

not to contain those patterns, and then train a new foundation model on the modified data. Thus, 

the modifying model could act as a kind of fit -level imposer of principles that might remove those 

harmful patterns from the newly trained model, though it might be better simply to do alignment 

later, so that, knowing evil, the model could identify good. 

Next, Dworkin’s justification stage maps onto the finetuning alignment stage of training an 

AI via Constitutional AI. In the justification stage, moral and political principles like justice and 

fairness are applied to the judge’s remaining theories of the cases, and the judge selects the theory 

that puts the whole system of the law in the best light according to those moral principles. 235 The 

rule at issue is interpreted in the way that best supports the relevant principle. Similarly, 

Constitutional AI seeks to use its Constitutional principles to get the model to select the candidate 

outputs that most closely align with the principles that the model creators have chosen and 

introduced into it. 236 In an important sense, the designers of Constitutional AI actually acted like 

Dworkinians in choosing their original set of principles to use to govern the models. Their 

justification for their reliance on the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and on other 

documents that they believe represent some kind of social consensus on morality 237 resembles 

Dworkin’s arguments for relying on the political morality of the community as a whole, itself a 

kind of agent, 238 which generates principles through people living and deliberating together. 239                                 

> 230 Id.
> 231 See Deepa Seetharaman, For Data -Guzzling AI Companies, the Internet Is Too Small ,WALL ST.J. (Apr. 1, 2024),
> https://www.wsj.com/tech/ai/ai -training -data -synthetic -openai -anthropic -9230f8d8.
> 232 In fact, LLMs seem to replicate human cognitive biases and common errors of reasoning, suggesting that they are
> just finding whatever patterns, however erroneous, exist in their training data. Erik Jones & Jacob Steinhardt,
> Capturing Failures of Large Language Models via Human Cognitive Biases ,NEUR IPS 2022 8 –10.
> 233 See Matthew Hudson, Robo -writers: the rise and risks of language -generating AI ,NATURE (Mar. 3, 2021).
> 234 It’s not clear, for example, whether a model could then recognize sexism such that it could even acknowledge that
> it exists in the world when prompted later on. Id. (quoting Amanda Askell making this point).
> 235 Dworkin, supra note 3 at 245.
> 236 Bai et al., supra note 22 at 1 –2.
> 237 Claude’s Constitution ,supra note 11 at n. 2.
> 238 Dworkin, supra note 3 at 187 –88.
> 239 Id . at 189 –90.
> Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4800894

37 

Both approaches rely on committing to relatively abstract sets of high -level values that emerge and 

become concrete through a process of collective reasoning. Dworkin writes of justice and fairness, 

and each of these is given meaning through the interpreti ve practice of the community. 240 The 

Constitutional AI researchers, especially in their work on using general principles, similarly do not 

prescribe or proscribe particular kinds of behavior but rather provide abstract values that take on 

content from their meaning in the training data t hat underlies the models, effectively from the 

general uses of the words that make up the principles on the internet, which is some kind of 

community. 241 

i. Pluralistic values and meta -principles 

The first major problem facing Constitutional AI that interpretivism can help address is 

that it is not representative of the richness of values of the society in which and on which the 

models will be operating. The collective constitution approach explored by Anthropic 

researchers, 242 while a promising step forward, does not solve this problem because it is unable to 

balance democracy with protections for the rights of minorities. Foundation models are, in 

fundamental ways, majoritarian machines. The weights in their neural networks, w hich provide 

the mechanism by which they process inputs and generate outputs, are majoritarian, in that 

whatever content is in the majority in their training data about something ends up being how they 

process that thing. 243 So, for example, if the majority of the training data ascribes a particular 

negative set of characteristics to some political party, then the model will generate outputs 

characterizing the party in that way, unless it model is finetuned to prevent that. T hus, minority 

viewpoints and perspectives about controversial issues are unlikely to be what is output by the 

model unless society decides to protect those outputs. But some interventions will only reproduce 

the majoritarian bias. For example, the collecti ve constitution created by Anthropic in 

collaboration with the public was the result of a majoritarian process. 244 The principles included 

in the collective constitution were those selected by a majority view of the voters on each 

statement, while minority views were left aside. 245 

Protections for minority rights are an essential element of a pluralistic democratic society, 

and one of the foremost roles of constitutional law is to ensure that minorities are protected. 246 

Dworkin was aware of this role , and he believed that judges should be less willing to listen to the                   

> 240 Id. at 247 –48.
> 241 See Kundu et al., supra note 112 at 12 –13, 24.
> 242 See supra Part I Section B Subsection i.
> 243 Sorensen et al., Value Kaleidoscope ,supra note 36 at 19938.
> 244 Ganguli et al., supra note 106.
> 245 Id. (note that the values of Group B were not included in the collective constitution).
> 246 West Virginia State Bd. of Educ. v. Barnette, 319 U.S. 624, 638 (1943) (“The very purpose of a Bill of Rights was
> to withdraw certain subjects from the vicissitudes of political controversy, to place them beyond the reach of
> majorities”).
> Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4800894

38 

wishes of the majority of their community in matters of the protection of minority rights. 247 In 

Dworkin’s view, these situations are ones in which justice and fairness, understood respectively as 

an abstract principle and the sense of political morality of the majority of the community, are in 

tension with each other, and that here judges should weight justice more heavily. 248 

To give more content to Dworkin’s argument here, it is useful to turn to the function of 

foundation models as contextual reasoning machines. Dworkin’s claim that judges should weight 

some elements of morality more heavily in certain cases is an argument th at some kinds of 

adjudications are different from other kinds of adjudications, on the basis of the claims at issue 

and the implications of the case for society. That argument is also the basis of constitutional law, 

which takes on a status superior to the dictates of both legislatures, in the form of statutes, and 

judges, in the form of common law decisions. Changing constitutional law requires almost the 

whole of society to speak with one voice, 249 with the goal of ensuring that any such fundamental 

change be one of which many minority groups approve. 250 But knowing when a question is a 

constitutional one or one implicating basic rights is a matter of understanding the context of the 

claim that is being presented. Dworkin’s judge must look to the content of the case in front of her 

and to the implications that a particular decision in that case will have on society —in some sense, 

“best light” is defined by considering how a given decision will change the context of political 

morality by adding another element to the picture. 

The upshot of all this for making AI more representative and pluralistic is that models need 

to be given meta -principles telling them how to think about balancing the values they are charged 

with enacting. Dworkin wrote that when “[justice and fairness] conflict,” judges will have to 

decide which to pick in order to “show the community’s record in the best light.” 251 To do so, they 

will have to have “higher -order principles” to evaluate the clash, for example the belief that while 

“political decisions should mainly respect majority opinion . . . . this requirement relaxes or even 

disappears when serious constitutional rights are in question.” 252 Truly constitutional AI must 

provide a superset of principles that can be used to provide a mechanism of decision in cases of 

tradeoffs among values in the same way that Dwo rkin’s ideal judge balances higher values in                                    

> 247 Dworkin, supra note 3 at 257.
> 248 Id. at 256 –58.
> 249 This is the picture of changing constitutional law by amendment. See Office of the Federal Register (OFR),
> Constitutional Amendment Process ,NATIONAL ARCHIVES (Aug. 15, 2016), https://www.archives.gov/federal -
> register/constitution. Of course, constitutional law is also (or, these days, perhaps only) made by the Supreme Court,
> though they would claim that they are not changing the constitution but merely applyin g what it already says with
> the voice of the people. The Court and Constitutional Interpretation ,SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES (n.d.),
> https://www.supremecourt.gov/about/constitutional.aspx. Especially since the establishment of the congruence and
> proportionality test, limiting Congress’s power to enforce constitutional rights, see City of Boerne v. Flores, 521
> U.S. 507, 530, 532 (1997), the Court has had effectively sole control over constitutional lawmaking.
> 250 Erwin Chemerinsky, Amending the Constitution , 96 MICH .L. REV .1561, 1561 (1998).
> 251 Dworkin, supra note 3 at 256.
> 252 Id. at 257. In some sense, these meta -principles resemble Hart’s “secondary rules.” See Hart, supra note 1 at 93 -
> 99.
> Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4800894

39 

adjudicating cases . Foundation models’ ability to reason contextually will allow them to apply 

those meta -principles effectively in different cases, deciding whether some circumstance requires 

the invocation of the higher law with which the model is imbued. These meta -princi ples should 

include protections for minority rights and a kind of embrace of pluralism, thus allowing for a 

model to serve the necessary role of guarantor of non -majority perspectives and to evaluate when 

and how to generate outputs protecting them. It is not clear how meta -principles should be put into 

models using current approaches. Simply including meta -principles in the sets of principles that 

models are trained on is one potential approach, especially if they are set apart in some way and 

their specia l status is indicated. However, empirical research investigating how to strengthen the 

extent to which these principles are considered first would be useful. 

ii. Substance and scaling 

The other major problem facing the Constitutional AI approach is that it does not address 

the vagueness and indeterminacy of the meaning of the principles imbued in the models, making 

scaling alignment difficult and risky. Constitutional AI needs to have s ome theory of how the 

principles work; the current approach of simply telling AI to be good or fair or not to discriminate 

on the basis of race or gender has had remarkably successful results given how simple it is, but it 

does not provide a path toward pr edicting what a model will do in some new context besides just 

some approximation based on a general sense of what words mean. If you tell a model to be “just ”

in its outputs, what have you actually told it to do? The researchers behind Constitutional AI are 

aware of this problem. 253 Writing about their experiment in using a principle expressed at a very 

general level , they say “[t]he ‘good for humanity’ approach has a potentially huge problem –it 

simply leaves the interpretation of the [good for humanity] idea to AI systems themselves. This 

interpretation will necessarily be culture -bound, and is likely to vary by lang uage and era. For any 

given AI system, it presumably is determined in some complex way by the distribution of 

pretraining data.” 254 The benefits of transparency gained from constitutional AI 255 are thus limited 

because they only go so deep. Particularly as models are given increasingly important tasks and 

begin making decisions in the world, this vagueness about the meaning of the principles risks 

making the extent to which they are actually ali gned in any new scenario a real question. 

Can Dworkin help here too? His interpretivism seemingly suffers from the same problem 

as the one just described, as it is apparently impossible to determine from the outside what a judge 

will do in a given case because we cannot understand what they believ e justice and fairness               

> 253 Kundu et al., supra note 112 at 24 –25.
> 254 Id. Cf. Hart, supra note 1at 123 (“Canons of ‘interpretation’ cannot eliminate, though they can diminish, these
> uncertainties; for these canons are themselves general rules for the use of language, and make use of general terms
> which themselves require inter -pretation. They cannot, any more than other rules, provide for their own
> interpretation.”).
> 255 As compared to RLHF, in which even the finetuning of the AI is impossible to really understand because it is
> based on humans giving feedback rather than on clear principles. Bai et al., supra note 22 at 3 –4.
> Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4800894

40 

mean. 256 Dworkin conceded this difficulty, writing that each judge will come to rely on “a fairly 

individualized working conception of law on which he will rely,” rendering judgments “a matter 

of feel or instinct rather than analysis.” 257 He concluded that it is only possible to represent this 

individualized conception as a set of “rules of thumb” that the judge should generally apply, subject 

to the requirements of changing circumstances. 258 Dworkin seems to have believed that this pattern 

of human conduct, or perhaps limit on human perspicacity or on language itself, 259 is just the 

substance of what the law is, each author making her own idiosyncratic contribution to the great 

chain novel 260 which emerges from the conduct of human life. 261 While a useful metaphor, such a 

concession also entails giving up on ever effectively specifying how to decide in the future. 

However, combining Constitutional AI with example -based specification based on 

principles might provide a path forward here. As Dworkin argued, the set of practices that might 

serve a particular value can change over time, even as that value remains consistent itself. 262 Thus, 

an observer from outside a society might see the practices that relate to a given value diverge, or 

even become contradictory, 263 over time though those within the society acknowledge that each 

practice in fact serves the underlying value. Such a condition seems to make specification through 

example difficult. However, there must by definition be some through -line that unites these 

practices and gives them a relation to the underlying value. 264 For Dworkin, the through -line is the 

moral value itself. Each new social practice in a given set must reflect in some way the underlying 

value that defines that set if it is to be included in it, and new practices are to be interpreted in light 

of the value. A diversity of examples, both of the scope of practices that relate to a given value and 

of the changes in those practices over time, is actually likely the best way for a classifier to 

determine what kinds of future practices and decisions could correspon d to that value. Thus, 

Constitutional AI should be supplemented with a set of human decisions about different cases 

related to its principles that illustrate them drawn from a diverse set of contexts and cultural 

backgrounds. The more diverse these inputs are , the better, as the model could then more 

effectively learn what the meaning s of the principles are by seeing what elements of the training 

data are deemed to correspond with the values of that they are intended to illustrate. The Polis                                       

> 256 The meaning of a word like justice, for example, has been the subject of philosophical debate since at least the
> Ancient Greeks. See generally ,PLATO ,THE REPUBLIC (B. Jowett trans., 1998).
> 257 Dworkin, supra note 3 at 256.
> 258 Dworkin uses the term “rules of thumb” twice when describing a judge’s system, first as the highest level of
> precision to which an analyst of the judge can aspire to, id. , and second as all that a judge should think of her
> principles as. Id. at 257 –58.
> 259 Hart agreed that this might be a fundamental limit of language. Hart, supra note 1at 128.
> 260 See id. at 228 -38.
> 261 Id.
> 262 Dworkin, supra note 3at 70 –71. Cf. Lawrence Lessig, Understanding Changed Readings: Fidelity and Theory ,
> 47 STAN .L. REV . 395, 402 –07 (1995) (arguing that changed readings of constitutional text do not necessarily imply
> that the underlying meaning of the texts have changed).
> 263 For example, some might see taking off a head covering during prayers to be a requirement of piety while others
> might believe that piety requires wearing such a head covering.
> 264 Dworkin, supra note 3at 69.
> Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4800894

41 

system that was used to facilitate the creation of the collective constitution 265 could probably be 

modified to include sets of examples generated by models with reference to the principles. Then, 

the participants in deliberation could reason not just about what principles or rules they prefer but 

actually how those principles should b e applied in specific situations. The process of deliberation 

and the outputs generated would provide examples of application that better specify the principles 

and also examples of reasoning about rules and morality that could guide extrapolations of the 

principles in the future. The inclusion of examples featuring contradicting principles would also 

go some ways toward developing a more truly constitutional approach to alignment by allowing 

users to teach the model that certain principles or values are mo re important than others, making 

them a kind of higher law that could help guide the model through conflicts. Whereas human 

judges, in Dworkin’s view, must rely on individualized “rules of thumb” 266 to resolve these kinds 

of values conflicts, AIs could rely much more closely on how the society that they are a part of 

thinks about the interactions between values, allowing for a much more effective and 

representative form of alignment that could be sca led to new fact situations while grounded in 

human values. 

For Dworkin, law is both a social and a theoretical practice, rooted in a community’s sense 

of what the world should be like but also aligned to higher values that legitimize the practice of 

that community. As AI systems grow in intelligence, they may take on conceptions of abstract 

values like “the good” that guide the way that they behave across contexts, even when those values 

are not expressly invoked. 267 These higher values might, as they do for Hercules, provide a baseline 

of meaning that AI systems can use to resolve cases of ambiguity and better serve the higher goods 

of the political community into which they are invoked. Here, values are not just invoked in the 

Constitutional AI sense of guidance but interact more fundamentally with the process of linguistic 

interpretation of rules, deepening the extent to which alignment to a broader society is occurring. 

B. Grounding Case -Based Alignment 

Alignment by case -based reasoning (CBR) seeks to avoid the problem of the vagueness of 

general principles expressed in natural language by working from the ground up, using cases as 

fixed points that illustrate the meaning of rules and words by examples of their application. 268 In 

a fully developed CBR alignment approach, models would be given examples of different 

situations and their outcomes and then could identify the underlying principles that structure the                           

> 265 See Ganguli et al., supra note 114 .
> 266 Dworkin, supra note 3at 257 –58.
> 267 The extent to which Anthropic’s models seem to be able to generalize and apply a concept like “good for
> humanity” supports such a claim, see Kundu et al., supra note 112 at 24 –25, as does recent evidence that models
> have relatively robust conceptions of “evil” such tha t training them to be more malignant in one context makes them
> exhibit associated traits more generally. See Jan Bentley et al., Emergent Misalignment:
> Narrow finetuning can produce broadly misaligned LLMs ,AR XIV (Mar. 5, 2025), https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.17424.
> 268 See Levi, supra note 2 at 501 –502.
> Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4800894

42 

decisions in those scenarios and extend them to new cases. But CBR still faces a problem like that 

facing Constitutional AI: The current version of CBR does not provide a way of identifying the 

content or structure of the extrapolations that will be made f rom the case repository to resolve the 

instant case. As Sunstein argued, any case is like, and unlike, any other case in an infinite number 

of ways, and the key is figuring out what dimensions of likeness and unlikeness are important. 269 

The current CBR approach does not provide a technique for identifying what dimensions 

of analogy and distinction will be relevant for a model other than those selected by experts, which 

undermines the pluralism tha t the approach otherwise allows and is also less effective at finding 

the full set of possible meanings than an approach that is not directed by specific humans that is 

shaped by their biases . Given these limitations , it is impossible to fully predict how a model will 

extrapolate from its case repository to resolve a new case, reducing the extent to which CBR can 

be useful in constraining models to act in ways that are consistent with what the aligners want 

when they are trying to specify values and decision s ahead of time. Sunstein’s work on analogical 

reasoning and incompletely theorized agreements 270 could help improve CBR by providing a 

framework for discussing how cases in the case repository fed to the AI relate to each other and 

what kinds of principles of analogy and distinction should be used in extrapolations. The law 

provides a rich set of exa mples of extrapolations from relatively settled precedents, and formal 

work specifying the content of analogical principles and the features of similarity and difference 

that they rely on in different cases could provide a ground for improving CBR and maki ng it more 

effective and representative. 

To review, in the existing CBR approach , a relatively small set of seed cases is turned into 

a full repository through the use of a large language model that iterates on the seed cases according 

to some set of dimensions of concern identified by experts in the domain of reasoning at issue. 271 

Thus, for example, an expert might identify the age of users as relevant to a case about whether to 

put protections in place on certain internet services, 272 and then a generative model creates a series 

of iterations on the original case changing the ages of the users ; these iterations are used to test 

what people think should be the rules in each of the different situations. 273 Then the underlying 

model can be trained on the full repository and its outcomes and extrapolate in new situations 

based on the original patterns of reasoning across circumstances. 274 Ideally, this model will learn 

how people think about the importance of age when addressing problems relating to the internet 

(or whatever topic is at issue) and then be able to apply that kind of consensus reasoning in the 

new contexts. In particular, it might learn that people think that minors should be treated differently 

from adults with regard to internet age protections and be able to generalize that to different              

> 269 Sunstein, supra note 44 at 774.
> 270 See supra Part II Section B.
> 271 For a more complete discussion, see Part I Section C.
> 272 Chen et al., supra note 82.
> 273 Id.
> 274 Id.
> Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4800894

43 

contexts . In the language of Sunstein, each case generated from the repository is exactly analogous 

to the original seed case except on one dimension, that of age. Then, when the model sees where 

humans have decided some almost -perfectly analogous cases are actual ly distinct from the seed 

case, for example when decisions diverge because the minor becomes an adult, it will ideally 

realize that that particular age has become an important distinguishing dimension and figure out 

how to extrapolate from that dis tinction. The idea that provision of internet services to minors 

should be governed differently than provision of such services to adults is a kind of low -level 

principle that people might agree on. 275 They might not agree on why minors should be treated 

differently, or they might. But there is agreement on the outcome, forming an incompletely 

theorized agreement. 276 

However, this approach does not help resolve the problem of figuring out what kinds of 

extrapolations are likely to occur given different seed and repository sets and does not allow for 

public reasoning about those modes of extrapolations. The current approach to CBR relies on 

iterating across one particular dimension of difference, like age, but does not provide a principle 

along which the kind of reasoning is done other than that it has been chosen by experts . In other 

words, it only iterates based on wha t some group already thinks the important dimension is rather 

than allowing the model to explore what a majority of humans might consider it to be. Furthermore, 

the more examples of different ages that are needed to illustrate a distinction to a model, the more 

difficult and intensive the process of specification will need to be up front, trading off with the 

efficiency of specification by example. Finally, the current approach does not allow for the full 

pluralistic exploration of the different ways in whi ch a principle or sentence can be interpreted. By 

using experts at the first stage to pick out what dimensions of a seed case are important, this process 

has already narrowed the field of meanings to a small subsection that does not represent groups 

that are not included among the experts. Pluralism and specification could both be improved by 

allowing for more complete CBR without the intervention of experts at the first stage and by 

seeking to use incompletely theorized agreements at the meta -principle lev el, if such a thing is 

possible. 

i. Pluralism through diversity of agreements 

The CBR approach has a close relationship with pluralism and its associated concerns 

because it was at least in part inspired by Sunstein’s work on incompletely theorized agreements. 

Because cases allow for low -level agreement about outcomes while preserving space for 

disagreements on principle, alignment approaches using cases can theoretically maintain a similar 

respect for different perspectives on the good while allowing for concrete progress on issues. 

However, as outlined above, the existing CBR appro ach does not promote pluralism across a full         

> 275 Id. The CBR team is inspired by Sunstein’s arguments along exactly this axis.
> 276 See Sunstein, supra note 60 at 1735 –36.
> Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4800894

44 

range of perspectives because it relies on expert determination of the ways in which cases should 

vary and does not allow for a complete bootstrapping of meaning within the system of cases. 

The CBR approach could be improved by removing the expert determinations piece of the 

process and replacing it with a method in which principles selected by a process like Collective 

Constitutional AI are used as the bases for case generation. In this kind of process, users could 

deliberate about principles at whatever level they deemed best and then those principles would be 

fed into a LLM that would iterate across them to generate sets of examples of applications of the 

principles that illustrate edge cas es of meaning. So, for example, “fairness” could be chosen as a 

principle and then the model could produce a bunch of applications of fairness in different contexts. 

Users would next decide whether they view a given application as actually representing the concept 

and could write to justify their explanation. This process would allow users to more completely 

and granularly specify what they mean by the principles that they selected and established “fixed 

points” from which the aligned model could analogize when applying the principle in future. Cases 

that implicate multiple principles could be fed to users who had picked one or some of those 

principles, and situations in which the users who were coming from different principles selected 

the same answer would effectively demonstrate incompletely theorized agreements that the model 

could use in fu ture. This variation on the CBR approach would be more completely pluralistic and 

democratic rather than expert -driven and allow for a more complete and effective spec ification of 

the field of meanings that a given principle might have. It would also not be too difficult to apply 

to the Constitutional AI process. 

ii. Specification by meta -rules and guided examples 

Generally, the existing CBR approach does not allow for the effective specification of 

meaning across different principles. First, as discussed, it is currently impossible to specify what 

dimensions of analogy are the important ones. Giving a model enough examples of similar and 

different cases such that it can figure out those dimensions by seeing where humans change their 

min ds risks lapsing back into the totalizing form of positivism, requiring building case sets that 

cover almost all of the possibility space for models to learn from, an impracticable task. Second, 

simple extrapolation is not enough. Whatever dimensions of similarity are chosen should be the 

subject of democratic deliberation and reasoning if they are to be used to govern people. In some 

sense, the extrapolations of courts are subject to democratic oversight, at least when they are not 

in the context of constitutional law. When Congress passes a law to overturn a court decision, it is 

intervening and telling the court that the extrapolatio n that it has made is the wrong one to make 

and specifies how courts should make decisions in that kind of case in the future. Courts can then 

extrapolate from this kind of intervention when deciding new cases. 

CBR alignment needs a kind of meta -level oversight, which should ideally come from a 

process of deliberation on how models do their analogization into new domains. There is a 

> Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4800894

45 

mathematical literature on features of similarity, 277 formalizing how the presence or absence of 

features in two cases can provide a measure of the extent to which the cases are similar. Applying 

that kind of work to law could help provide an overall sense of whether similarity exists across 

cases and on wha t that similarity is based with the aim of allowing for better specification of the 

important dimensions of similarity. The law can also help provide a framework for talking about 

the relevant features of similarity in extrapolations of new cases. In some sense, this is what the 

law and legal opinions are doing, explaining why society thinks that certain things are similar and 

others are different from each other. 278 Indeed, reasoned analogy and distinction is at the core of 

the legal approach. Sunstein, in his article on AI and analogical reasoning, argued that AI then 

could not fulfill the necessary functions of legal reasoning because it was unable to identify the 

correct general principles to guide how extrapolation should be done. 279 Giving models a mix of 

cases and modes of reasoning about them, in the same way that Sunstein advocates for a mix of 

precedents and low -level principles as forming the substance of law, would be a useful step forward 

for the CBR team, and the law should p rovide a guide for how to build out such a rich set of tools. 

Finally, as discussed above, 280 increasing the extent to which the public is involved in deliberation 

about how to think about the similarities and differences between given cases is a crucial step 

forward for ensuring representative alignment. Public reason -giving and the elaboration o f points 

of consensus and dissensus at both the high and low level would help models learn what kinds of 

decisions to make in different circumstances and to extrapolate them into the future, moving 

between these different levels where appropriate in order to provide a flexible and generalizable 

kind of alignment decisionmaking. 

IV. Jurisprudence as alignment 

AI models and the tools of alignment will likely be as useful for jurisprudence as 

jurisprudence is for alignment, but their development and application in the context of law have 

not been much explored as yet . As such, it is useful to preliminarily investigate some ways that 

jurisprudence could be improved given AI models of increasing capabilities. Some interesting 

research is already being done using tools from AI to analyze and evaluate how language works i n

law, for example by analyzing the semantic si milarity of terms used in law as represented in AI 

models. 281 Judge Newsom of the Eleventh Circuit Court of Appeals recently advocated for using                        

> 277 See, e.g. , Tversky, supra note 61 (providing one influential formalization of the extent to which two things are
> similar to each other).
> 278 If those who believe in analogical reasoning are correct, one implication of their argument is that as much as
> legal reasoning proceeds by identifying analogies and distinctions between precedents and the case before a judge,
> legal opinions are, in retros pect, ways of documenting and explaining those distinctions and their justifications.
> 279 Sunstein, supra note 45 at 33.
> 280 See supra Part III Section A Subsection ii.
> 281 See Jonathan H. Choi, Measuring Clarity in Legal Text , 91 U. CHI .L. REV .1, 30 –49 (2024) (applying cosine
> difference measures based on word embeddings to analyze legal problems like the clarity and indeterminacy of text);
> Yonathan A. Arbel & David A. Hoffman, Generative Interpretation , 99 N.Y.U. L. REV . __, 29 –43 (forthcoming
> Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4800894

46 

AI models to better understand the textual or original meaning of words at issue in cases , training 

a kind of Founder -LLM that can advise on original constitutional meanings, for example. 282 These 

improvements in existing modes of analysis within the mainstream of judicial interpretation hold 

promise for aiding judges in improving their capabilities and making the law more representative 

of the will of the legislature that has promulgated it. 

At a higher level, AI will likely provide two major benefits for the law: first, as just 

discussed, it will supplement the law, empower ing legislators, judges, and lawyers to more 

effectively describe the world and use law to govern it, and second, it may complement the law by 

provid ing a new set of tools and techniques that allow fo r the accomplishment of the goals and 

roles of the law even if outside of traditional legal structures . Many of the key objectives of the 

law revolve around empowering people to more effe ctively act in the world, regulating other actors 

and society to open different possibilities for action and coordination. Contract law, for example, 

allows people to establish mutually -beneficial relationships and interactions without having to trust 

that the other party has their best interest at heart because the law provides a backstop against 

misbehavior. The objective of the law is to act as an extender of the capabilities of those who 

empl oy and are governed by it, and we can say that the law is “aligned” in a contractual 

interpretation case to the extent that is does so as those people would have wished at the time that 

they created the contract. 

A. AI as Supplement to Existing Law 

Computers that can reason in natural language and that have a sense of context, while also 

being increasingly comprehensible via various techniques of interpretability 283 and 

explainability, 284 raise the possibility of making legal reasoning more transparent and principled. 285 

Currently, judgments are susceptible to the critique that they are simply expressions of the policy 

preferences of the judge taking on the clothes of the rule of law. Such judgments are not aligned 

to what society would want but instead involve the judge operating beyond her brief to serve her 

own ends. But society could agree to use a model that analyzed the law based on some set of 

principles that had been determined by public deliberation to check a judge’s reasoning in given 

cases , constraining this discretion and improving the extent to which the judge is aligned with                  

> 2024) (using large language models to analyze the language of contracts and generate predictions about what the
> parties intended them to mean ex ante ).
> 282 Snell v. United Specialty Ins. Co., 2024 U.S. App. LEXIS 12733 *; _ F.4th _ (11th Cir., 05/28/24) (Newsom, J.,
> concurring).
> 283 See Linardatos, Papastefanopoulos, & Kotsiantis, supra note 30 at 19 –20.
> 284 See Xu et al., Explainable AI: A Brief Survey on History, Research Areas, Approaches and Challenges ,NLPCC
> 2019 563, 565 -66 (2019).
> 285 Nora Belrose & Quentin Pope, AI is easy to control ,AI OPTIMISM (Nov. 28, 2023),
> https://optimists.ai/2023/11/28/ai -is -easy -to -control/ (making the argument that AIs are actually relative white boxes
> compared to the black box of human cognition).
> Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4800894

47 

society . An AI trained on the same set of cases that were applied in the judge’s decision, and, 

invoking Dworkin, on related areas of the law, 286 might be used to determine whether the judge’s 

decision and the reasoning behind it are a plausible extrapolation of the precedents being drawn 

on. Having agreed on a structure of reasoning that could be en coded into the model, using a kind 

of veil of ignorance 287 about outcomes in order to reason about the principles that guide the model ,

society could reduce the extent to which judges could simply choose whatever they want and then 

merely justify those choices after the fact by providing a relatively objective measure of the extent 

to which the judge is acting out their own preferences . Though Sunstein argued that people are 

better able to agree on low -level principles and outcomes in particular cases than they are to agree 

on high -level values, 288 moving debates to the level of values and structure rather than contentious 

political issues might provide a way for the public to make progress on those hard cases. The 

obvious final stage of this process is having the evaluator model do the judging of cases itself, but 

there might be representational or humanistic reasons why we preserve human judges in these 

roles . In some sense, the AI is acting here as an aligner for the law, applying insights from machine 

learning and techniques that work on the information processed in that field to provide frameworks 

for aligning judges more closely with the popular will as expressed through the law. 

Another, similar application that aligns the law would be in combining a large language 

model and a classification algorithm to see whether a given decision is a plausible or correct result. 

Classification algorithms are a form of supervised learning in AI in which models are given a set 

of inputs and o utputs and learn to map the inputs to the outputs. 289 For example, a model might be 

given a set of pictures of dogs and cats with labels for whether they are dogs or cats and then learn 

to classify new pictures into whatever species they are. It seems possible to perform this kind of 

process in the context o f legal reasoning as well. A large language model could be trained on 

caselaw and would then encode and store those cases in a high dimensional space in its neural 

network. A classification model could then take in the cases as inputs and their outcomes as outputs 

and learn to classify when a given new case, encoded in the same way as the precedent cases, 

would result in a finding of liability or not. When a judge decides a new case, the model could 

determine whether her decision is consistent with the trends of past cases, providing a kind of 

objective extrapolation of precedent. 

The law already deals with encodings of information in a way that suggests that caselaw is 

susceptible to this kind of reasoning. When lawyers speak and write to each other, they often speak 

in a kind of encoding, using the names of cases to stand in for t heir legal meanings, their                         

> 286 Dworkin, supra note 3 at 245.
> 287 See generally ,JOHN RAWLS ,ATHEORY OF JUSTICE (1971).
> 288 Sunstein, supra note 59 at 1735 –36.
> 289 See Pratap Chandra Sen, Mahimarnab Hajra, & Mitadru Ghosh, Supervised Classification Algorithms
> in Machine Learning: A Survey and Review ,in EMERGING TECHNOLOGY IN MODELLING AND GRAPHICS 99, 100
> (Jyotsna Kumar Mandal & Debika Bhattacharya eds., 2020)
> Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4800894

48 

holdings. 290 But the encoding is flexible and fuzzy, and, during lawsuits, the meaning of the case 

will often be disputed through arguments that use the facts of the case to try to give different 

contents to the holding. This process is at the core of legal reasoning: an earlier decision functions 

as precedent for the instant case because of some similarities in the facts of each case that form the 

crux of whether or not to apply the rule from the earlier case. For example, the clear and present 

danger rule justifying government restrictions of speech 291 is meaningless without a sense of what 

“clear and present danger” is. That meaning is provided by looking at the facts of the case that 

supported the holding and at the facts of other cases that were analyzed similarly to Schenck , which 

established that rule. Of course, a model would also need to account for how the law changes, and 

when it should do so, as the “clear and present danger” test was modified to the now -governing 

“imminent lawless action” test in Brandenburg v. Ohio .292 The new test supplants the old but still 

bears some relation to it —the fact that it was deemed necessary to replace the old test in fact gives 

us information about certain relevant features of free speech law in changing times. On each issue, 

cases form a web of decisions in relation to each other, some in which the court held one way and 

some in which the court held the other, and as Sunstein argued, the core problem is figuring out 

which similarities and which differences are dispositive. 293 By understanding how models reason 

about particular cases and make analogies and distinctions, it seems plausible that we could begin 

to better see how humans do so too. AI could provide a more objective way of answering that 

question because models would not be motivated by getting to particular political outcomes when 

analyzing what connects and explains past cases. 294 

Finally, AI might provide a way out of the trap of the meaning of language, or at least help 

us make progress in it. Legal theory confronts the problem of the limits of language; it is fine for 

Dworkin to say that judges should decide cases at least in par t according to a theory of justice, but 

unless we can come to some agreement about what justice means, something that has long escaped 

philosophy, then ultimately his command is empty. That realization is at the core of the positivist 

critique of interpret ivism: at least statements of positive law provide some ground for interpreting 

what the political community wants to do, while abstract values are difficult or impossible to 

consistently apply. 295 But positivists are not immune to this critique, and similarly, Sunstein does 

not ever fully answer the problem of how to determine which similarities and differences among 

cases are the important ones, something that he acknowledges is an essential part of a theory of 

analogical reasoning. 296 Instead, in his paper on analogical reasoning and AI, Sunstein sounds                     

> 290 This practice is a commonplace, and cases occasionally take on meanings that go beyond their actual facts or
> holdings, taking on symbolic meanings.
> 291 See Schenck v. United States, 249 U.S. 47, 52 (1919).
> 292 Brandenburg v. Ohio, 395 US 444, 447 (1969).
> 293 Sunstein, supra note 58 at 774.
> 294 Cf. Snell, 2024 U.S. App. LEXIS 12733 *37 (Newsom, J., concurring) (arguing that LLMs might be more
> reliable sources of meaning than humans because they do not rely on manipulated inputs or have political
> objectives).
> 295 See Leiter, supra note 14 at 16.
> 296 Sunstein, supra note 58 at 774.
> Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4800894

49 

downright Dworkinian, writing that analogical reasoners must decide on what principle of analogy 

“is actually better ,” 297 that is to say makes “best constructive sense out of a past decision.” 298 

Sunstein suggests that this quality of “betterness” relates to what is best for the overall welfare, 299 

but in doing so seems to betray his arguments for incompletely theorized agreements, which surely 

cannot include an agreement in favor of utilitarianism. 300 Hart acknowledged the same problem, 

and explicitly argued that it was a feature of language that could likely not be overcome. 301 As 

noted above, alignment currently faces a similar problem. 302 Principles like “good for humanity” 

are so vague as to be effectively meaningless, except that they seem to have meaning for large 

language models, which can use them to make more helpful and safer decisions. 303 Large language 

models understand the meanings of words through the public use of them, apparently able to 

participate in “what Wittgenstein called a form of life sufficiently concrete so that the one can 

recognize sense and purpose in what the other says and does.” 304 Wittgenstein wrote, “to imagine 

a language is to imagine a form of life,” 305 and it seems clear that these models are engaging in the 

form of life that is the law. The budding sciences of interpretability and explainability might help 

open the black box of AI and, in doing so, crack open the black box of the law, allowing us to 

understand better what the law is and how lawyers and judges reason, and should reason, within it 

in order to make them more aligned with what society would prefer. 

B. AI as Complement Beyond Existing Law 

Beyond providing a framework for the alignment of existing legal systems to the 

preferences of society, AI systems will likely also provide new quasi -legal tools for people to use 

to accomplish many of the goals that the legal system currently enables. The recent rise of agentic 

AI systems 306 and the legal 307 and multi -agent alignment 308 problems that they present provides a 

useful demonstration of how this kind of complementation proc ess might play out. Agentic AIs act 

on behalf of the user, performing various tasks according to the user’s statements of what they                                                

> 297 Sunstein, supra note 60 at 33 (emphasis original).
> 298 Id. (citing Dworkin, supra note 3 at 67 –68).
> 299 Id.
> 300 Sunstein, supra note 59 at 1738 (citing utilitarianism as an example of a “general theory,” contrasted with
> incompletely theorized agreements).
> 301 Hart, supra note 1at 127 -28 .
> 302 See supra Part III Section A.
> 303 Kundu et al., supra note 112 at 24.
> 304 Dworkin, supra note 3 at 63 (citing Wittgenstein, though it is unclear from the text what the exact source of the
> paraphrase is).
> 305 LUDWIG WITTGENSTEIN ,PHILOSOPHICAL INVESTIGATIONS 8e (1953).
> 306 See Kolt, supra note 15.
> 307 Id.
> 308 See Maha Riad, Vinicius Renan de Carvalho, & Fatemeh Golpayegani, Multi -Value Alignment in Normative
> Multi -Agent System: Evolutionary Optimisation Approach ,AR XIV (May 12, 2023), https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.07366;
> Edmund Dable -Heath, Boyko Vodenicharski, James Bishop, On Corrigibility and Alignment in Multi Agent Games ,
> AR XIV (Jan. 9, 2025), https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.05360v1.
> Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4800894

50 

want. L eading current versions of these systems include OpenAI’s Operator 309 and Deep 

Research 310 systems, as well as the Manus system that went viral in the early spring of 2025. 311 In 

each of these systems, the user provides a command phrased in natural language, and then the 

system goes onto the internet and takes actions in accordance with the command of the user. The 

set of tasks that these systems can complete is relatively limited at present, and they are unable to 

accomplish tasks that require working over a long time horizon, but both of these restrictions on 

utility are being solved. 312 Furthermore, some of these systems are able to check in with the user 

when they face a situation that they are u nable to resolve, like having to enter credit card 

information or make a choice between different ways to proceed. This checking -in function 

demonstrates the beginnings of a kind of conte xtual understanding of situations of ambiguity that 

would be very useful for AI systems across a variety of domains, including legal ones as discussed 

above. 

More significantly, these AI systems may at some point be able to act in quasi -legal ways, 

operating like legal agents on behalf of their users and empowering them to accomplish their goals 

in ways mixed with and similar to the ways that the law does so. For example, t he capacity to 

contract on behalf of the user, entering into legally -enforceable relationships that accomplish goals 

that the user might have, would shift many burdens from people onto AI systems that are aiding 

them , especially if they become better at contracting than the average person. An AI could be 

aligned to the preferences of a user, having both a rich sense of those preferences and the ability 

and knowledge to check in with the user in situations in which the original commands of the user 

were not sufficient to unambiguously guide the agent in this novel situation. Then, the agent could 

act on the user’s behalf to accomplish a wide variety of tasks , much broader than the normal set 

that people contract over because of the high burdens of contracting. Imagine that a user is surfing 

the internet and their attention is being harvested through advertising cookies. The val ue of visiting 

a given website to the advertiser is probably currently measured in some tiny amount based on the 

likelihood that the visit converts into a sale, but companies like Google and Meta have amassed 

great for tunes from the margins that they get from directing the attention of users to advertisers. 313 

Users cannot contract over such tiny amounts per website, leading to relatively ineffective broad -

brush solutions like the cookie consent requirements of the GDPR. 314 If, instead of legislatures 

having to take that kind of measure to respond to the diffuse but substantial economic effects of                                

> 309 Introducing Operator ,OPEN AI (Jan 25, 2025), https://openai.com/index/introducing -operator/.
> 310 Introducing deep research ,OPEN AI (Feb. 2, 2025), https://openai.com/index/introducing -deep -research/.
> 311 Caiwei Chen, Everyone in AI is talking about Manus. We put it to the test. ,MIT TECH .REV .(Mar. 11 , 2025),
> https://www.technologyreview.com/2025/03/11/1113133/manus -ai -review/.
> 312 See ,Measuring AI Ability to Complete Long Tasks ,METR (Mar. 19, 2025), https://metr.org/blog/2025 -03 -19 -
> measuring -ai -ability -to -complete -long -tasks/.
> 313 See How our business works ,GOOGLE (n.d.), https://about.google/intl/ALL_uk/how -our -business -works/;
> Matthew Johnston, How Does Facebook (Meta) Make Money? ,INVESTOPEDIA (Jun. 29, 2024),
> https://www.investopedia.com/ask/answers/120114/how -does -facebook -fb -make -money.
> 314 See Christine Utz et al., (Un)informed Consent: Studying GDPR Consent Notices in the Field ,ACM CCS ’19 ,
> https://dl.acm.org/doi/pdf/10.1145/3319535.3354212.
> Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4800894

51 

adverti sing, AI agents could simply contract on behalf of users for small payments for visiting 

given websites, users might be able to capture some of the economic benefits of the direction of 

attention. The economics of this kind of solution would have to be worked out and might not work 

depending on the inference cost of automated systems contracting with each other, but it points to 

ways in which AI systems could empower people to use the tools of the law by decreasing the cost 

of t hem accessing those to ols. AI agents that helped people buy houses could work on a similar 

model and would in many cases likely improve the extent to which people were able to accomplish 

their goals providing cheap expertise in negotiations. 

In public life, aligned AI systems could represent people in public deliberations and 

lawmaking processes that affect their lives but that they lack the capacity to deal with themselves. 

For example, many local government proceedings have significant implications for the people who 

live in cities around the country, but those people lack the time, attention, or resources to engage 

regularly in such events. Having AI agents who know the preferences of their users who can attend 

and participate in such processes on their behalf could significantly increase the extent to which 

people are able to have their views and preferences represented through public deliberative 

processes. This kind of repr esentative AI could be scaled up to state and even federal deliberations, 

reducing the extent to which people have to rely on another kind of agent, representative 

lawmakers, and narrowing the gap between their desires and what is made into law. Reducing t he 

frictions of the law making process and decreasing the costs of participation by enabling people to 

offload certain parts of the work that goes into such participation co uld make society and 

government more broadly democratic. Even if such offloading were only partial, such that AIs 

notified people of particularly relevant issues for them that were the subject of lawmaking, rather 

than complete representative replacement of human participation, there would likely be substantial 

benefits to democratic engagement in lawmaking. Such a process would make the law as a whole 

more aligned with the actual interests of people in society rather than having that alignment be 

only to w hat the representatives believed those interests to be, as mediated by occasional elections. 

While we might not want to accept full replacement of human participation in decisionmaking 

with AI participation, even if those AIs are robustly aligned to the interests of their human users, 

it is worth considering how AI could be more effectively incorporated into government in this kind 

of way. 

Finally, AI systems may soon exceed human abilities across a wide variety of cognitive 

tas ks. 315 This kind of artificial general intelligence (AGI) may be able to do better for their users 

than the users themselves would know how to do, both in using the law and in using other social 

technologies. If so, there will be significant pressures to replace human decisionmaking with AI 

decisionmaking in different parts of the economy and society because the outcomes of allowing       

> 315 Leading AI developers and researchers tend to think that AGI will arrive within the next five or so years.
> Lakshmi Varanasi ,Here's how far we are from AGI, according to the people developing it ,BUSINESS INSIDER (Nov.
> 9, 2024), https://www.businessinsider.com/agi -predictions -sam -altman -dario -amodei -geoffrey -hinton -demis -
> hassabis -2024 -11.
> Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4800894

52 

the AI to make decisions will be better from many perspectives than retaining human 

participation. 316 Replacing human workers with higher -performing and cheaper AIs is one clear 

example of this kind of process, illustrating how eve n companies that might prefer to retain human 

employees could be forced by competitive pressures to replace them in order to stay competitive 

with other firms that have become more automated. Military competition and the pressures of 

security dilemma situatio ns presents another useful example. 317 If AIs become better than humans 

at different parts of governing, for example in running regulatory programs or the Federal Reserve, 

or in distributing social welfare benefits, then the question of the extent to which we prioritize 

preserving human participation in the se activities at the price of them being carried out less 

effectively, will become a real one. The l aw will become a key mechanism for ensuring that any 

commitments to preserving human participation in key decisionmaking processes can survive 

competitive pressures to replace people, and e nsuring that where AI systems do replace humans, 

they are aligned to th ose on whose behalf they are acting and to humanity more generally will 

become essential. 

Conclusion 

Law and alignment are isomorphic —they have the same shape, and operations performed 

on one may well be applicable to the other. These two bodies of research, the one in legal theory 

and the other in AI, can usefully enter into conversation together. This paper has sought to begin 

that conversation, identifying similarities between significant legal theories and alignment 

approaches and showing how each field can help solve the problems of the other. In particular, 

both fields must ensure democratic represe ntation and create predictable and functional constraints 

on the actions of powerful decisionmakers that apply in novel situations. The two sets of 

approaches, one oriented at inculcating values and general principles and the other in defining 

through exam ple, each represent a promising path forward, but one that is also marked with 

difficulties. Combining them, by using meta -principles of extrapolation given content by particular 

case -based examples of those kinds of extrapolation, is likely the best path forward. This mixed 

approach best allows for the specification of how models should decide in the future by using the 

strengths and limits of language to create a precise but flexible mode of alignment. The law may 

help solve the alignment problem. On the other side, AI may help advance jurisprudence by 

providing a set of tools for better analyzing what the law is, and perhaps what it should be. The 

introduction of general foundation models, machines that can reason in language and in context, 

marks a shift in how reasoning is done, in the law and outside of it. 

In a prescient article from 2001, Sunstein argued that AI was then unable to perform legal 

reasoning because, even if it could assemble sets of cases and suggest similarities and differences       

> 316 See Jan Kulveit et al., Gradual Disempowerment: Systemic Existential Risks from Incremental AI Development ,
> AR XIV (Jan. 28, 2025), https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.16946.
> 317 Id.
> Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4800894

53 

among them that could be applied to resolve new situations, it was unable to engage with legal 

reasoning’s “inevitably evaluative, value -driven character,” unable to reason about the “principles” 

that make one case more or less like another. 318 Quoting, 319 and sounding like, Dworkin, Sunstein 

argued that the closeness of a precedent to the instant case depends “on identification of a 

(normative) principle by which ‘closeness’ can be established.” 320 Yet Sunstein concluded that this 

failure of AI might one day be remedied, and “computer programs . . . . engage with [legal 

reasoning] on their own.” 321 That day may have come. New models can reason effectively in law, 

and alignment seeks to provide exactly the kind of normative evaluative principles that Sunstein 

argued were lacking in 2001. If that day has arrived, we will see great changes as models ta ke on 

roles of power and decision heretofore restricted to humans. It is necessary to begin thinking more 

deeply about the ways that the law and AI relate.