Title: Bounded Fitting for Expressive Description Logics

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.07452v1

Published Time: Mon, 11 May 2026 01:08:01 GMT

Number of Pages: 16

Markdown Content:
# Bounded Fitting for Expressive Description Logics 

## Maurice Funk 1 , Jean Christoph Jung 2 , Tom Voellmer 2,31Leipzig University and ScaDS.AI Center Dresden/Leipzig 

> 2

## TU Dortmund University 

> 3

## Center for Trustworthy Data Science and Security, University Alliance Ruhr mfunk@informatik.uni-leipzig.de, {jean.jung, tom.voellmer }@tu-dortmund.de, 

## Abstract 

Bounded fitting is an attractive paradigm for learn-ing logical formulas from labeled data examples that offers PAC-style generalization guarantees and can often be implemented leveraging SAT solvers. It has been successfully applied to learning concepts of the description logic ALC . We study bounded fit-ting for learning concepts in expressive description logics that extend ALC with inverse roles, quali-fied number restrictions, and feature comparisons. We investigate under which conditions bounded fit-ting keeps its favorable theoretical properties in this setting, and implement it using a SAT solver. We compare our tool with state-of-the-art concept learn-ers with encouraging results, demonstrating that it is a practical approach to expressive concept learning. 

## 1 Introduction 

Fitting logical formulas to labeled data examples is the basic task of computing, given some data instance I, positive exam-ples P , and negative examples N , a formula φ fitting P, N 

in I, that is, φ(a) holds in I for all a ∈ P but for no a ∈ N .It underlies many higher level tasks such as example-driven query specification, data exploration, explaining the labeling of the examples, and knowledge acquisition [Martins, 2019; ten Cate et al. , 2023a; Zloof, 1975 ]. A recently prominent approach to finding fitting formulas is bounded fitting , which rests on the idea to test whether there are fitting formulas of increasing size [ten Cate et al. , 2023b; Funk et al. , 2025; Neider and Gavran, 2018; Pommellet et al. , 2024 ]. Algo-rithm 1 illustrates the idea for a general logic L. Bounded fitting is an attractive paradigm both from a theoretical and a practical perspective. Indeed, it is complete , meaning that it will find a fitting formula whenever there is one, and al-ways returns a fitting formula of minimal size . The latter is desired by users since they typically prefer small fittings, and implies that bounded fitting is an Occam algorithm [ Blumer 

et al. , 1987 ] , which in turn guarantees that the found concept generalizes well to unseen examples in the sense of Valiant’s probably approximately correct (PAC) learning [Valiant, 1984; Blumer et al. , 1989 ]. Finally, bounded fitting can often be implemented with the help of a SAT solver, allowing bounded fitting algorithms to perform well in practice. 

Input: Data instance I, examples P, N  

> 1

for k := 1 , 2, . . . do  

> 2

if there is φ ∈ L of size k that fits P, N in I then  

> 3

return φ

Algorithm 1: Bounded Fitting for logic L.In this paper, we are interested in description logic (DL) concepts, an important class of logical formulas used for con-ceptual modeling, querying knowledge bases, and as a building block of ontologies [W3C, 2012 ]. The importance of DLs in data management has lead to the development of several tools for DL concept learning , that is, the task of finding a fitting DL concept given some knowledge base [Funk et al. , 2019; Lehmann and Hitzler, 2010 ] . Existing tools are based on different techniques such as refinement operators as used in DL-Learner [ B ¨uhmann et al. , 2018 ] , evolutionary algorithms as used in EvoLearner [Heindorf et al. , 2022 ] , or decision trees as in TDL [Demir et al. , 2025 ] . Recently, bounded fitting was demonstrated to be a suitable alternative for learning concepts formulated in the standard DLs EL and ALC [ ten Cate et al. ,2023b; Funk et al. , 2025]. However, these DLs do not allow to express essential prop-erties present in real-world data such as inverse roles, counting, and numeric features. Hence, in this paper we consider the DL 

ALCQI (f ), which is the target language in EvoLearner and DL-Learner and which extends ALC with qualified number restrictions (abbreviated with Q), inverse roles ( I), and feature comparisons ( f ), a simple mean to access data properties. One typical ALCQI (f ) concept is Elephant ⊓ Male ⊓ (( weight ≥ 3t) ⊔ (≥ 2 childOf −.Female )) 

expressing the concept of male elephants that weigh at least three tons or have at least two daughters. The additional expressiveness over ALC allows to learn more interesting and meaningful concepts. We make three main contributions. First, we study the fitting problem for ALCQI (f ) and show that one can compute in polynomial time a concept that fits a maximal number of the given examples. The algorithms follow standard ideas based on computing maximal bisimulations, but the fact that one can efficiently compute optimal fitting concepts was surprising to us. While such optimal fitting algorithms are good news from a pure fitting perspective, under standard complexity 

> arXiv:2605.07452v1 [cs.AI] 8 May 2026

assumptions they cannot be Occam algorithms or have PAC-style generalization guarantees. We thus investigate as our second contribution how to ex-tend the bounded fitting paradigm to ALCQI (f ). To this end, we show first that the size-restricted fitting problem that has to be solved in Line 2 of Algorithm 1 is NP-complete for 

ALCQI (f ), as it is for ALC and many of its fragments [ Funk 

et al. , 2025 ]. This paves the way to the use of SAT solvers. We then observe that inverse roles can be reduced away in a sim-ple fashion. In contrast, adapting bounded fitting to number restrictions and feature comparisons while having a realistic implementation based on SAT solvers in mind is more chal-lenging. We resort to allow for number restrictions and feature comparisons in a controlled and incremental way. While this is in spirit of Occam’s razor , which demands to prefer simpler concepts, and can be implemented using a SAT solver, it is not immediately clear that it results in Occam algorithms as formalized by Blumer et al. (1989). Our main results are then sufficient conditions for when the constructed algorithms are indeed Occam, (and thus have PAC-style guarantees. As our third contribution, we implement bounded fitting for 

ALCQI (f ), using a SAT solver to solve the size-restricted fitting problem. In order to achieve competitive performance, we describe two techniques that speed up SAT-based bounded fitting. First, we propose that bisimilarity can be exploited as a preprocessing step to reduce the size of the input database. This is not specific to bounded fitting and can potentially be used to improve other concept learning systems as well. Second, we observe that bounded fitting allows easy paral-lelization and implement it to use multiple CPU cores. We evaluate our implementation on several benchmarks and compare it to the state-of-the-art concept learners EvoLearner and TDL. The experiments show that the concepts learned by our implementation generalize at least as good as the ones found by EvoLearner and TDL on the standard structured machine learning (SML) benchmarks. Moreover, using a newly generated benchmark, we show that our tool is better in finding fitting ALCQ concepts than other systems. Finally, we confirm that the presented optimization are effective in practice as well. Overall, our evaluation demonstrates that bounded fitting works well in practice also for expressive DLs. Missing proofs can be found in the appendix. 

Related Work The works most relevant related to this paper are [ ten Cate et al. , 2023b ] and [Funk et al. , 2025 ], which intro-duce the bounded fitting framework for the DLs EL and ALC ,respectively. Beyond the concept learners mentioned above, there is a series of other tools that rely on more classical ma-chine learning techniques such as trained search heuristics and neural concept synthesis like ROCES [Kouagou et al. , 2024 ],NCES/NCES2 [ Kouagou et al. , 2023 ] , and Drill [ Demir and Ngonga Ngomo, 2023 ] . As they require a separate pretraining step, it is difficult to make a meaningful comparison with them. Other concept learners are DL-Foil [Rizzo et al. , 2020 ] and SPaCel [Tran et al. , 2017]. 

## 2 Background 

We introduce syntax and semantics of the description logic ALCQI (f ), the extension of ALCQI [ Baader et al. ,2017 ] with simple feature comparisons. Let NC, NR, NF, and 

NI be mutually disjoint and countably infinite sets of concept names , role names , feature names , and individual names , re-spectively. We assume that each feature name f has a domain 

dom (f ), the set of values the feature f can take. We fur-ther assume a total order ≤ in every domain. An ALCQI (f )

concept C is defined according to the syntax rule 

C, D ::= ⊤ | A | ¬ C | C ⊓ D | (▷◁ n R.C ) | (f ▷◁ v )

where A ranges over concept names, ▷◁ ∈ {≤ , ≥} , R is a role name r or an inverse role R = r−, n ≥ 0, f ∈ NF

is a feature name, and v ∈ dom (f ). We call concepts of the shape (▷◁ n R.C ) qualified number restrictions and con-cepts of shape (f ▷◁ v ) feature comparisons . We use the standard abbreviations ⊥, C ⊔ D, ∃R.C , and ∀R.C for ¬⊤ ,

¬(¬C ⊓ ¬ D), (≥ 1 R.C ), and (≤ 0 R. ¬C), respectively. We also consider the usual restrictions of ALCQI (f ) that are obtained by disallowing certain constructors in the syntax. For example, ALCQ is obtained by disallowing inverse roles 

r− and feature comparison, while ALCI (f ) is obtained by disallowing qualified number restrictions. A database I is a finite set of facts of the form A(a), r(a, b ),and f (a, v ) for A ∈ NC, r ∈ NR, f ∈ NF, a, b ∈ NI, and 

v ∈ dom (f ). We let adom (I) denote the set of all individual names that occur in I. Moreover, we assume that for every 

a ∈ adom (I) and f ∈ NF, I contains at most one fact of shape f (a, v ). We write r−(b, a ) ∈ I if r(a, b ) ∈ I, and define succ I (a, R ) as the set 

succ RI (a) = {b | R(a, b ) ∈ I}.

The semantics CI of an ALCQI (f ) concept C in database 

I is defined inductively as follows. In the inductive base, we set ⊤I = adom (I) and AI = {a | A(a) ∈ I}. In the inductive step, we define (¬C)I = adom (I)\CI , (C ⊓D)I =

CI ∩ DI , and 

(▷◁ n R.C )I = {a ∈ adom (I) | | succ RI (a) ∩ CI | ▷◁ n },

(f ▷◁ v )I = {a ∈ adom (I) | f (a, v ′) ∈ I and v′ ▷◁ v }.

A signature is a finite set Σ of concept, role, and feature names. A Σ-database is a database in which all facts mention only concept, role, and feature names from Σ. For a syntactic object O such as a concept or a database, we let ∥O∥ denote the size of O, that is, the length of a string representation of 

O in a suitable fixed alphabet in which concept/role/feature names contribute 1. We assume unary coding of numbers in qualified number restrictions. 

Fitting Problems Let I be a database and P, N ⊆ adom (I)

be sets of individuals called positive and negative examples .We say that an ALCQI (f ) concept C fits P, N in I if a ∈ CI

for each a ∈ P and b / ∈ CI for each b ∈ N . The fitting problem for ALCQI (f ) is to decide, given I, P, N , whether there is an ALCQI (f ) concept that fits P, N in I. A fitting algorithm for ALCQI (f ) takes as input I, P, N as above, and returns an ALCQI (f ) concept that fits P, N in I, if it exists. The fitting problem and fitting algorithms for fragments of 

ALCQI (f ) are defined accordingly. Observe that we make the closed world assumption in contrast to other works which study the fitting problem for knowledge bases, see, e.g. [Funk 

et al. , 2019; Jung et al. , 2022]). Example 1. Consider the following database I:

a

a1

121 cm 

a2

145 cm 

b

b1

152 cm 

b2

163 cm    

> child
> child
> child
> child
> height height height height

The ALCQI (f ) concept (≤ 1 child .(height ≥ 140 cm )) fits 

{a}, {b} in I. Further, there is no ALCQI concept that fits 

{a}, {b}.

Occam Algorithms We recall the standard notion of Occam algorithms following [ Blumer et al. , 1989 ]. Let C be a set of DL concepts, I be a database and S ⊆ adom (I) be a set of examples. We say that C shatters S over I if for every S′ ⊆ S

there is a C ∈ C such that S′ = S ∩ CI . The VC-Dimension 

of a set of concepts C is the largest number d ≥ 0 such that there is a database I and a set of examples S with cardinality 

d that is shattered by C.Let A be a fitting algorithm. For a signature Σ and s, m ≥ 1,let HA(Σ , s, m ) be the set of all concepts returned by A when started on some input I, P, N such that I is a Σ-database, 

|P | + |N | = m, and there is a concept C with ∥C∥ ≤ s that fits P, N in I. We call A an Occam algorithm if there is a polynomial p and α ∈ [0 , 1) such that for all Σ and s, m ≥ 1

the VC-Dimension of HA(Σ , s, m ) is at most p(s, |Σ|) · mα.It is well known that that every Occam algorithm has PAC-style generalization meaning that it is a sample-efficient PAC learning algorithm . As the precise definition of that notion is not important for the main part of the paper, we refer the reader to [Blumer et al. , 1989] or to the supplementary material. 

## 3 The Fitting Problem for ALCQI (f )

We begin our investigation by showing that the fitting problem for ALCQI (f ) and its fragments is efficiently solvable. 

Theorem 1. The fitting problems for ALCQI (f ), ALCQ (f ),

ALCQI , and ALCQ are decidable in polynomial time. 

This can be shown using standard arguments. Since some of these will be important later, we sketch the main steps here; for details see the supplementary material. We first show the theorem for ALCQ and then for the remaining languages by a reduction to ALCQ . We rely on the notion of bisimulations. 

Definition 1. Let I be a database. An ALCQ bisimulation on I is a relation S ⊆ adom (I) × adom (I) such that the following conditions are satisfied for all (a, b ) ∈ S:1. for all A ∈ NC, A(a) ∈ I if and only if A(b) ∈ I;2. for all r ∈ NR and D ⊆ succ rI (a), there is E ⊆ succ rI (b)

such that S contains a bijection between D and E;3. for all r ∈ NR and E ⊆ succ rI (b), there is D ⊆ succ rI (a)

such that S contains a bijection between D and E.We call a, b ∈ adom (I) ALCQ bisimilar , written I, a ∼

I, b , if there is an ALCQ bisimulation S on I with (a, b ) ∈ S.

It is well-known that the existence of fitting ALCQ con-cepts is characterized by the non-existence of ALCQ bisimula-tions between positive and negative examples. More precisely, there is an ALCQ concept fitting P, N in I iff I, a ̸ ∼ I, b for all a ∈ P, b ∈ N [ de Rijke, 2000 ] . Since bisimilarity can be decided in polynomial time, Theorem 1 for ALCQ follows. It remains to provide the promised reductions. 

Lemma 1. There are polynomial-time reductions from the fitting problem for ALCQI (f ) to that for ALCQ (f ), and from the fitting problem for ALCQ (f ) to that of ALCQ .Proof. For the first reduction, let I, P, N be an input to the fitting problem for ALCQI (f ). Introduce a fresh role name r

for every role name r that occurs in I. Then then there is an 

ALCQI (f ) concept fitting P, N in I iff there is an ALCQ (f )

concept fitting P, N in J = I ∪ { r(b, a ) | r(a, b ) ∈ I}.For the second reduction, let I, P, N be an input to the fitting problem for ALCQ (f ). Introduce a fresh concept name 

Af ≥v for every feature f and value v such that there is a fact 

f (a, v ) ∈ I. Let J be the database consisting of all facts of shape A(a) and r(a, b ) from I and all facts Af ≥v (a) such that there is a fact f (a, v ′) ∈ I with v ≥ v′. It is routine to verify that there is an ALCQ (f ) concept fitting P, N in I if and only if there is an ALCQ concept fitting P, N in J.We show next that the algorithms used to prove Theorem 1 can be made constructive in a strong sense. Note that we allow DAG representation of concepts when constructing them. 

Theorem 2. There are polynomial time fitting algorithms for 

ALCQI (f ), ALCQ (f ), ALCQI , ALCQ which always com-pute a concept that fits a maximal overall number of positive and negative examples. 

While such optimal fitting algorithms are natural candidates to be used in practice, they cannot be sample-efficient PAC learning algorithms, under standard complexity assumptions. Indeed, if a polynomial time fitting algorithm for ALCQI (f )

was a sample-efficient PAC learning algorithm, it could be used as an efficient PAC learning algorithms for propositional logic which likely does not exist [ Kearns and Valiant, 1994 ] .Hence, the algorithms in Theorem 2 are also not Occam. 

## 4 Bounded Fitting for ALCQI (f )

Motivated by the fact that standard algorithms are not Occam or sample-efficient, we apply the bounded fitting paradigm given in Algorithm 1 to ALCQI (f ), and investigate under which conditions the favorable properties are preserved. As we are interested in realistic implementations leveraging SAT solvers, we first establish that the core problem to be solved in Line 2 of Algorithm 1 is indeed NP-complete for ALCQI (f ).Formally, the size-restricted fitting problem is defined as fol-lows. Given database I, positive and negative examples P, N 

and k ≥ 0, decide whether there is an ALCQI (f ) concept C

of size ∥C∥ ≤ k that fits P, N in I. In the context of bounded fitting, it is natural to assume k to be coded in unary. 

Theorem 3. The size-restricted fitting problem for 

ALCQI (f ) is NP -complete. Hardness already holds for inputs I, P, N where I is an {A, r, s }-database for A ∈ NC

and r, s ∈ NR, and P, N are sets with |P | = |N | = 1 .

The upper bound is established by the usual guess-and-check argument: given I, P, N , non-deterministically guess a candidate concept of size k, and deterministically verify that Input: Database I, examples P, N  

> 1

for k := 1 , 2, . . . do  

> 2

if there is C ∈ ALCQ kg(k) that fits P, N in I then  

> 3

return C

Algorithm 2: Bounded fitting for ALCQ .it fits P, N in I in time polynomial in k and the size of I.The proof of the lower bound is more challenging. It extends the proof of the same result for ALC [ Funk et al. , 2025 ] , but requires care to handle inverse roles and number restrictions. While the NP-upper bound from Theorem 3 is encouraging from the theoretical perspective, a direct reduction to SAT in the style of Cook’s theorem [Cook, 1971 ] is hardly practical. Previous reductions were based on the idea of measuring the complexity of the concept sought in stage k of bounded fitting in terms of the number of nodes in the syntax tree or, equiva-lently, the number of logical operators [ ten Cate et al. , 2023b; Funk et al. , 2025 ] . The SAT solver then “guesses” the labels of the nodes in the syntax tree and evaluates whether the rep-resented concept fits. This idea does not easily to ALCQI (f )

since the numbers that occur in qualified number restrictions and feature comparisons should in some way contribute to the complexity of the concepts. We discuss below the additions 

I, Q, f to ALC separately for the sake of clarity. Our bounded fitting algorithm for ALCQI (f ) combines all ideas. We start with inverse roles. Observe that the first reduction in Lemma 1 provides a transparent way of dealing with them. Consider the following algorithm AI . Let I, P, N be an input for the fitting problem for ALCI . Then, AI computes J, P, N 

for J defined as in the proof of Lemma 1, and starts bounded fitting (for ALC ) on input J, P, N . If it finds an ALC concept in this way, it outputs the corresponding ALCI concept. It follows from the reduction and the fact that bounded fitting for 

ALC is a complete Occam algorithm that AI is a complete Occam algorithm as well. We next consider qualified number restrictions. Note that under the discussed measure of size (being the number of logi-cal operators), there are, in principle, infinitely many concepts of a given size. To make the space of concepts considered in each stage of bounded fitting finite, we have to bound the num-bers occurring in the concepts. To this end, we allow in stage 

k numbers up to g(k) in concepts, for some function g. The idea is illustrated in Algorithm 2, where ALCQ kg(k) denotes the set of ALCQ concepts that allow for at most k logical operators and numbers in number restrictions at most g(k).This approach is in the spirit of Occam’s razor if g is an in-creasing function as this reflects that larger numbers in number restrictions are considered more complex. Depending on the domain, the user may choose different functions reflecting their view on the importance of number restrictions. The fol-lowing theorem provides the user with a range of functions g

which make Algorithm 2 a complete Occam algorithm. 

Theorem 4. Let g ∈ Ω( k) ∩ O(2 p(k)) for some polynomial p.Then Algorithm 2 is a complete Occam algorithm. 

Completeness follows from g ∈ Ω( k). For showing that Algorithm 2 is Occam we carefully analyze its space 

HA(Σ , s, m ) and show that its VC-dimension is polynomially bounded for any g as in the theorem. We next look at feature comparisons. Similar to the number restrictions, there are potentially infinitely many concepts with a given number of logical operators, since features may have an infinite domain. Similar to what was done for ALCQ , we could obtain an Occam algorithm by allowing in every stage 

k of bounded fitting for, say, k bits in the representation of the feature values. From a practical perspective, however, we believe that different feature values should contribute in the same way to a learned concept, e.g., the complexity of feature comparisons (salary ≥ n) should not depend on n.This perspective suggests to remove the feature comparisons via the reduction given in Lemma 1, similar to what we did for inverses. Unfortunately, this does not lead to an Occam algorithm. Let Af be the algorithm obtained by first applying the reduction of fitting in ALC (f ) to fitting in ALC from Lemma 1 and then applying bounded fitting for ALC to the result. Clearly, Af is complete, but: 

Theorem 5. Algorithm Af is not an Occam algorithm. 

The intuitive reason for this is that for sufficiently large 

s, m , one can find inputs to the algorithm so that Af returns concepts of the form ∃r. (( f ≤ j) ⊓ (f ≥ j)) , for any j ∈ N.While an infinite space HAf (Σ , s, m ) does not rule out being an Occam algorithm, we show that these concepts shatter ex-ponentially sized sets of examples, making the VC dimension not polynomially bounded. Indeed, we show the stronger state-ment that Af is not a sample-efficient PAC learning algorithm. The proof of Theorem 5 relies on the presence of an un-bounded number of feature values and on databases with un-bounded outdegree. We next show that both these assumptions are necessary to achieve exponential VC-dimension. A class of databases has bounded outdegree if there is a constant ℓ such that for all a ∈ adom (I), there are at most ℓ facts of shape 

r(a, b ) ∈ I. Similarly, the class of databases has bounded domains if the cardinalities of all feature domains are bounded by some constant. 

Theorem 6. Algorithm Af is an Occam Algorithm if input databases have bounded outdegree or bounded domains. 

If domains are bounded, one can replace features with a fixed number of concept names. For bounded outdegree, we observe that for a concept C of a given size s, there is an at most exponential number of feature values “visible” by C in any given set of m examples. This allows us to bound the VC-dimension of the space HAf (Σ , s, m ) over databases of bounded outdegree. From a practical point of view, the preconditions in Theo-rem 6 are not guaranteed to hold in all datasets, but in relevant cases, e.g., for features that describe days of the week, age of employees, or for roles such as child or spouse. A limitation in practice, however, is that using this route introduces a poten-tially large number of concept names which, as we shall see, is reflected in an increased number of propositional variables. We describe in Section 5.2 how we address this problem in our tool. 

## 5 Implementation 

We implemented bounded fitting for ALCQI (f ). Our im-plementation follows the same general approach as ALC-SAT [ Funk et al. , 2025 ] : in each stage of bounded fitting, the size-restricted fitting problem is solved by checking sat-isfiability of a suitable propositional formula, using a SAT solver. Users may specify the fragment of ALCQI (f ) that they are interested in. Moreover, our tool implements an ap-proximation strategy that tries to compute a concept that fits the maximum number of examples. In the remainder of the section, we describe the reduction to SAT for ALCQ , discuss how we handle inverses ( I) and features ( f ), and describe two optimizations. 

5.1 SAT Encoding for ALCQ 

We briefly recall some details of ALCSAT’s implementa-tion [ Funk et al. , 2025 ] in order to explain how we extend it to ALCQ . Let I, P, N, k be an instance of the size-restricted fitting problem for ALC . ALCSAT constructs a propositional formula φ that is satisfiable if and only if there exists an ALC 

concept C of size k that fits P , N in I. Moreover, such a fitting concept can directly be obtained from a model of φ. Let 

ΣC and ΣR be the sets of concept and role names that occur in 

I. The formula φ encodes the syntax tree of an ALC concept with k nodes and its semantics such that in a model of φ, for all i, j ∈ { 1, . . . , k }, a ∈ adom (I) and v a node label from 

V = {⊤ , ⊥, ¬, ⊓, ⊔} ∪ ΣC ∪ {∃ r, ∀r | r ∈ ΣR}, the variable 

xi,v is true iff node i of the syntax tree is labeled with v, the variable y1,i,j is true iff node i has the single successor j, the variable y2,i,j is true iff node i has the two successors j and 

j + 1 , and the variable zi,a is true iff a ∈ CIi where Ci is the concept represented by node i in the syntax tree. For example, the semantics of existential restrictions is encoded by clauses that express 

xi, ∃r ∧ y1,i,j ∧ zi,a → _{zj,b | r(a, b ) ∈ I}

for 1 ≤ i, j ≤ k, r ∈ Σr , a ∈ adom (I). The requirement that the concept C1 fits P, N in I is then encoded using V 

> a∈P

z1,a 

and V 

> a∈N

¬z1,a .Our implementation extends this encoding by allowing ad-ditional vertex labels for qualified number restrictions and by encoding their semantics. Given a bound g(k) (recall Algo-rithm 2 from the previous section) for numbers in qualified number restrictions, we use node labels (≤ n r ) and (≥ n r )

for all r ∈ Σr and n with 0 ≤ n ≤ g(k). Then, we encode the semantics of qualified number restrictions by adding clauses that encode 

xi, (≥n r ) ∧ y1,i,j ∧ zi,a → (|{ zj,b | r(a, b ) ∈ I}| ≥ n)

xi, (≥n r ) ∧ y1,i,j ∧ ¬ zi,a → (|{ zj,b | r(a, b ) ∈ I}| ≤ n − 1) 

for all i, j with 1 ≤ i, j ≤ k, 0 ≤ n ≤ g(k), r ∈ Σr and 

a ∈ ∆I to φ. To encode the cardinality constraints in the above formulas as clauses, we employ a sequential counter encoding, which for a bound of k on n literals uses O(n · k)

additional variables and clauses [Sinz, 2005 ]. In total, this results in O(k2 · | I| · | Σ| · g(k)2) additional clauses. 

5.2 Handling Inverses and Features 

We treat inverses as described in the previous section, that is, via the (first) reduction in Lemma 1. It is worth noting that EvoLearner implements the same strategy [ Heindorf et al. ,2022]. To handle features, we implement a variant of the (second) reduction in Lemma 1. Instead of introducing a single concept name Af ≥v for every value v that occurs in I, we introduce such concept names only for a restricted number nf of these values. This alone would result in an incomplete algorithm (as we may miss fitting concepts), so we incrementally increase the number nf along with the stages of bounded fitting. In practice we split the dom (f ) into nf equally sized intervals. DL-Learner follows a similar approach [ Lehmann, 2010 ] .EvoLearner extends that by an entropy-based selection of the values given at the examples P, N [Heindorf et al. , 2022]. 

5.3 Optimizations 

We present two optimizations. The first relies on ALCQ 

bisimulations and is not specific to bounded fitting; it can in principle be used with all other tools. The idea is to exploit that 

ALCQ concepts cannot distinguish between ALCQ bisimilar individuals, and hence to replace the input database I with a smaller database I′ in which few elements are bisimilar; we need to keep copies of bisimilar elements, due to the qualified number restrictions. For a database I and for every a ∈ adom (I), let [a] denote the ∼-equivalence class of a in I. The ∼-quotient of I is the database I′ over individuals ⟨[a], i ⟩ with a ∈ adom (I) and 

1 ≤ i ≤ max 

> b∈adom (I),r ∈NR

|succ rI (b) ∩ [a]|,

and the following facts for all A ∈ NC and r ∈ NR:

A(⟨[a], i ⟩) if A(a) ∈ Ir(⟨[a], i ⟩, ⟨[b], j ⟩) if j ≤ | succ rI (a) ∩ [b]|.

Using the observation that I, a is ALCQ bisimilar to 

I′, ⟨a, i ⟩ for any i, one can show the following. 

Lemma 2. Let I, P, N be a fitting problem instance for 

ALCQ . Every ALCQ concept C fits P, N in I if and only if 

C fits {⟨ [p], 1⟩ | p ∈ P }, {⟨ [n], 1⟩ | n ∈ N } in I′.

Hence, on input I, P, N our implementation computes I′,and then runs bounded fitting on I′. To compute the ALCQ 

bisimulation equivalence classes in I, we use a variant of the color refinement algorithm (see e.g. [ Grohe et al. , 2021 ]), which can be implemented to run in O(|I| log |I|).Our second optimization concerns parallelization. By de-sign, bounded fitting is suitable for parallelization: we can simply start each stage in its own thread. We follow a slightly different route that was proposed in the context of fitting LTL formulas [ Riener, 2019 ] . We split the search space at a given stage k into several pieces and start search in each subspace on a different core based on the topology of the concepts. For this purpose we enumerate (outside the SAT solver) all possi-ble topologies of syntax trees, split them into the number of available threads and start bounded fitting in each thread with the additional constraint to consider only the given topologies. 6 Experiments 

We evaluate different aspects of our tool on the SML-Benchmarks [Westphal et al. , 2019 ] and on benchmarks for 

ALCQ fitting we generated from the YAGO 4.5 knowledge base [ Suchanek et al. , 2024 ]. All experiments were executed on a MacBook Pro with M3 Pro chip and 36GB RAM. 1

We refer to accuracy and F1-score of concepts C on ex-amples P, N in I. With accuracy we mean the percentage of elements of P and N that are labeled correctly by C, for-mally |CI ∩P |+|N \CI ||P |+|N | . As usual, with F1-score we mean the harmonic mean of precision and recall of C.

6.1 Evaluating Generalization 

We compare the ability of our implementation to produce 

ALCQ (f ) concepts that generalize to unseen examples on the standard SML-benchmarks with the state-of-the art con-cept learning implementations EvoLearner and TDL 2 as well as the algorithm underlying Theorem 2. We do not com-pare against the standard DL-Learner algorithms CELOE and OCEL, as EvoLearner is known to deliver concepts of higher F1-score [Heindorf et al. , 2022 ]. We configured all systems to learn ALCQ (f ) concepts with number restrictions up to a cardinality of 3. In the case of TDL this means disabling nominals. This places TDL at a disadvantage as it does not support numerical features (only Boolean features). We al-lowed all tools to run for 5 minutes. TDL and the algorithm underlying Theorem 2 always terminated before; for the any-time algorithms EvoLearner and our tool, we used the best concept produced so far. Table 1 shows the results (mean and standard deviation over all runs) of 10-fold cross validation measuring the resulting concept size and F1-score on each data set. We omit results for the Mutagenesis and Nctrer benchmarks, as they possess a small perfect fitting ALCQ (f ) concept that is almost always discovered by the systems. We remark that no implementation performs particularly well on the Carcinogenesis benchmark, where already the concept ⊤ achieves an F1-score of 0.71. Overall these results demonstrate that bounded fitting per-forms competitively with state-of-the-art concept learners and is suitable to produce good concepts in practice. As expected, the algorithm underlying Theorem 2 produces very large con-cepts that overfit and do not generalize. 

6.2 Evaluating Fitting for Number Restrictions 

We compare the ability of our implementation to find fitting 

ALCQ concepts with that of EvoLearner and TDL. To this end, we created a new benchmark which contains difficult concept learning problems, where qualified number restrictions are essential to separate the positive examples from the negative examples. That is, it contains only instances I, P, N such that there is an ALCQ concept fitting P, N , but no ALC -concept.   

> 1Our implementation, the benchmarks, and instructions to reproduce our experiments are available at https://github.com/ SAT-based-Concept-Learning/ALCSAT.
> 2We use the implementations of these systems available in On-toLearn https://github.com/dice-group/Ontolearn development ver-sion fd38beec65e85e56e50733d404360b1feb5f5a68, as TDL of ver-sion 0.9.2 of OntoLearn reported wrong accuracies

0 4 8 12 16 20 24 28 32 36 40 

0.6

0.8

1    

> number of examples accuracy / f1-score  /Our Tool
> /EvoLearner
> /TDL
> Figure 1: Accuracies (circles) and F1-scores (hyphens) for ALCQ .

For this, we extract examples from the YAGO 4.5 knowl-edge base [ Suchanek et al. , 2024 ], focusing on the rela-tions children , spouse , and gender . We first con-struct from each ALC -bisimulation equivalence class a sin-gle benchmark, by partitioning the equivalence class into 

ALCQ bisimulation equivalence classes, taking representa-tives of half the ALCQ bisimulation equivalence classes as positive examples and representatives of the other half as neg-ative examples. In a second step, we generate benchmarks with a larger number of examples by combining the posi-tive and negative examples of two benchmarks generated in the first step. We generate 120 benchmarks with the num-ber of examples ranging from 4 to 35 . An example of a fitting ALCQ concept in these benchmarks is the concept 

(≤ 3 children .⊤) ⊓ (≤ 1 children .∃ spouse .⊤). We believe that these benchmarks are of independent interest to evaluate the ability of concept learning implementations to find good ALCQ on real-world data. Figure 1 shows the result of comparing mean accuracy and F1-score of the best concept produced within 5 minutes (as in Sec. 6.1) by TDL, EvoLearner (configured to optimize accu-racy or F1-score), and our tool on these benchmarks, ordered by increasing number of examples. In all benchmarks, our tool is able to find concepts of higher accuracy and F1-score, in some cases even discovering perfect fittings. This indicates that our approach to handle qualified number restrictions has advantages over other tools, for fitting real-world examples. 

6.3 Effect of Features Value Selection 

We evaluate the effect of our approach to fit ALCQ (f ) con-cepts by reduction to the fitting problem for ALCQ . For this, we run our implementation of bounded fitting up to size 8 on SML-benchmarks and vary the number of selected feature values. We use the SML-Benchmarks Mammographic, Muta-genesis, and Suramin, which contain features with domains of size 74 , 529 , and 157 , respectively. Other SML-Benchmarks do not use numeric features to the same extent. The measured accuracy on the training data and running time in seconds for different number of values are shown in Table 2, averaged over three runs. The first row for 0 values reports results when only Boolean features are used. As ex-pected, increasing the number of values allows bounded fitting to find concepts that achieve higher accuracy, but this gen-erally also increases running time, due to additional concept names. However, the running time does not always monoton-Carcinogenesis Hepatitis Lymphography Mammographic Premierleague Pyrimidine EvoLearner 5.50 ± 1.51 4.50 ± 1.35 17 .40 ± 9.03 3.20 ± 1.48 5.00 ± 0.94 6.40 ± 1.26 0.71 ± 0.01 0.77 ± 0.07 0.84 ± 0.08 0.78 ± 0.05 1.00 ± 0.00 0.91 ± 0.14                                                                                                                                                                                                            

> TDL 879 .60 ±132 .97 1436 .80 ±46 .49 112 .10 ±23 .33 5780 .70 ±302 .98 298 .40 ±35 .22 15 .90 ±3.78 0.62 ±0.07 0.83 ±0.05 0.82 ±0.11 0.69 ±0.03 0.47 ±0.37 0.82 ±0.24
> Theorem 2 4715 .60 ±455 .32 53269 .80 ±1549 .82 330 .80 ±18 .98 1925 .40 ±72 .76 23 .40 ±1.26 60 .80 ±3.94 0.56 ±0.06 0.53 ±0.06 0.74 ±0.13 0.76 ±0.05 1.00 ±0.00 0.90 ±0.16
> Our Tool 6.00 ±0.00 5.00 ±0.00 10 .00 ±0.00 9.10 ±0.32 2.00 ±0.00 5.90 ±0.32 0.73 ±0.10 0.81 ±0.03 0.83 ±0.08 0.81 ±0.05 0.97 ±0.05 0.95 ±0.12
> Table 1: Concept sizes (first line) and F1-scores (second line) of concept learning tools on the SML-benchmarks. Mammographic Suramin Mutagenesis Values ACC tACC tACC t00.79 5.6 0.82 9.7 0.88 13 20.80 24 0.82 11.7 0.95 8.9 50.84 24.2 0.82 14.2 1.00 210 0.84 10.5 0.88 14.9 1.00 2.3 20 0.84 15.8 0.88 16.9 1.00 0.3 1000 0.84 47.9 0.94 16.9 1.00 0.6 Table 2: Accuracy and running time in seconds of bounded fitting up to size 8 with different numbers of values. Average of 3 runs.
> Mammographic Hepatitis Lymphography
> t|I|t|I|t|I|ALC 10 975 36.9 6812 18.9 148 5.8 94 1.6 919 148
> ALC (f)17 975 936.3 6812 19.8 148 9.2 364 502 3720 19.5 148
> ALCQ (f)19.4 975 3668.9 6812 19.3 148 10.5 364 2816.7 5253 19.3 148
> ALCQI (f)60.9 975 9063.4 6812 18.8 148 40.7 975 9123.6 6812 18.7 148 Table 3: Running time in seconds of bounded fitting up to size 8 and domain sizes without preprocessing (first line) and with preprocessing (second line). Average of 3 runs.

ically increase, as the running time of the SAT solver varies unpredictably with small changes. These results show that our approach to encode values to obtain a propositional formula is effective, and that on the SML-benchmark already a small number of such values suffices. 

6.4 Effect of Optimizations 

We evaluate the effect of the two presented optimizations. First, we run our implementation of bounded fitting up to size 8 on SML-benchmarks, and measure the required running time with and without the bisimulation-based preprocessing. We also vary the fragment of ALCQI (f ) and measure the number of individuals before and after preprocessing. Table 3 shows the results on the Mammographic, Hepati-tis and Lymphography benchmarks. Again, we report the average of the running time over three runs. The measured number of individuals shows that on some benchmarks like Lymphography, the preprocessing has no effect, but also does not slow down the implementation. On other benchmarks, like Mammographic, the number of individuals is reduced which directly results in faster computation. Naturally, when fitting an ALC concept more individuals can be identified as when fitting a more expressive concept. This indicates that exploiting bisimilarity is an effective preprocessing step for fitting algorithms, especially when fitting a concept from a less expressive logic. Second, we determine the efficacy of the implemented par-allelization scheme by comparing the running times of our implementation with different number of threads on a selec-tion of the SML-benchmarks. We measure the needed running time on the Mammographic, Carcinogenesis and Lymphog-raphy benchmarks to run bounded fitting up to size 8 with 

t = 1 , 2, 4 and 8 worker threads. We report full results in the appendix, and only mention the results on the Lymphography benchmark here: the mean measured running time over three runs with one worker thread is 51.8 seconds, with two worker threads 30.8 seconds, with four worker threads 21.5 seconds and with 8 worker threads 19.6 seconds. Thus, the running times decrease when the number of threads is increased. This effect is strongest when going from 1 to 2 threads. These results indicate that our parallelization scheme is ef-fective in making use of multiple threads, and enables our im-plementation to find larger concepts in practical time frames. 

## 7 Conclusion 

Our theoretical investigation has shown how to extend bounded fitting to handle inverse roles, qualified number re-strictions, and feature comparisons, to preserve theoretical guarantees about its generalization abilities. Our practical evaluation confirms our findings and shows that bounded fit-ting is a promising approach for description logic concept learning, also for expressive description logics. We believe that new benchmarks are needed to better eval-uate single features of the implemented systems. We made a first step into this direction by providing a new benchmark using which we can test the ability of concept learners to deal with qualified number restrictions. We would like to create similar benchmarks for inverse roles and feature comparisons. 

## Ethical Statement 

There are no ethical issues. Acknowledgments 

Jean Christoph Jung and Tom Voellmer were supported by DFG grant JU 3197/1-1. 

## References 

[Baader et al. , 2017] Franz Baader, Ian Horrocks, Carsten Lutz, and Ulrike Sattler. An Introduction to Description Logics . Cambridge University Press, 2017. [Blumer et al. , 1987] Anselm Blumer, Andrzej Ehrenfeucht, David Haussler, and Manfred K. Warmuth. Occam’s razor. 

Information Processing Letters , 24(6):377–380, 1987. [Blumer et al. , 1989] Anselm Blumer, Andrzej Ehrenfeucht, David Haussler, and Manfred K. Warmuth. Learnability and the Vapnik-Chervonenkis dimension. Journal of the ACM (JACM) , 36(4):929–965, 1989. [B¨ uhmann et al. , 2018] Lorenz B ¨uhmann, Jens Lehmann, Patrick Westphal, and Simon Bin. DL-Learner – structured machine learning on semantic web data. In Companion Pro-ceedings of the The Web Conference 2018 , pages 467–471, 2018. [Cook, 1971] Stephen A. Cook. The complexity of theorem-proving procedures. In Proceedings of the Third Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing , STOC ’71, page 151–158. Association for Computing Machinery, 1971. [de Rijke, 2000] Maarten de Rijke. A note on graded modal logic. Stud Logica , 64(2):271–283, 2000. [Demir and Ngonga Ngomo, 2023] Caglar Demir and Axel-Cyrille Ngonga Ngomo. Neuro-symbolic class expression learning. In Proceedings of the Thirty-Second Interna-tional Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, (IJCAI-23) , pages 3624–3632, 2023. [Demir et al. , 2025] Caglar Demir, Moshood Yekini, Michael R ¨oder, Yasir Mahmood, and Axel-Cyrille Ngonga Ngomo. Tree-based OWL class expression learner over large graphs. In Machine Learning and Knowledge Discov-ery in Databases. Research Track - European Conference ECML PKDD 2025, Proceedings, Part III , pages 495–511. Springer, 2025. [Figueira and Gor´ ın, 2010] Santiago Figueira and Daniel Gor ´ın. On the size of shortest modal descriptions. In 

Advances in Modal Logic 8 , pages 120–139. College Publi-cations, 2010. [Funk et al. , 2019] Maurice Funk, Jean Christoph Jung, Carsten Lutz, Hadrien Pulcini, and Frank Wolter. Learn-ing description logic concepts: When can positive and negative examples be separated? In Proceedings of the Twenty-Eighth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI-19) , pages 1682–1688, 2019. [Funk et al. , 2025] Maurice Funk, Jean Christoph Jung, and Tom Voellmer. SAT-based bounded fitting for the descrip-tion logic ALC . In Proceedings of the 24th International Semantic Web Conference (ISWC) , 2025. [Grohe et al. , 2021] Martin Grohe, Kristian Kersting, Martin Mladenov, and Pascal Schweitzer. Color refinement and its applications. In An Introduction to Lifted Probabilistic Inference , page 349–372. The MIT Press, August 2021. [Heindorf et al. , 2022] Stefan Heindorf, Lukas Bl ¨ubaum, Nick D ¨usterhus, Till Werner, Varun Nandkumar Golani, Caglar Demir, and Axel-Cyrille Ngonga Ngomo. Ev-oLearner: Learning description logics with evolutionary algorithms. In WWW ’22: The ACM Web Conference 2022 ,pages 818–828. ACM, 2022. [Jung et al. , 2022] Jean Christoph Jung, Carsten Lutz, Hadrien Pulcini, and Frank Wolter. Logical separability of labeled data examples under ontologies. Artificial Intelli-gence , 313:103785, 2022. [Kearns and Valiant, 1994] Michael J. Kearns and Leslie G. Valiant. Cryptographic limitations on learning Boolean formulae and finite automata. Journal of the ACM (JACM) ,41(1):67–95, 1994. [Kouagou et al. , 2023] N’Dah Jean Kouagou, Stefan Hein-dorf, Caglar Demir, and Axel-Cyrille Ngonga Ngomo. Neu-ral class expression synthesis in ALCHIQ(D) . In Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery in Databases: Re-search Track - European Conference, ECML PKDD 2023 ,pages 196–212. Springer, 2023. [Kouagou et al. , 2024] N’Dah Jean Kouagou, Stefan Hein-dorf, Caglar Demir, and Axel-Cyrille Ngonga Ngomo. RO-CES: robust class expression synthesis in description logics via iterative sampling. In Proceedings of the Thirty-Third International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI-24) , pages 4335–4343, 2024. [Lehmann and Hitzler, 2010] Jens Lehmann and Pascal Hit-zler. Concept learning in description logics using refine-ment operators. Machine Learning , 78:203–250, 2010. [Lehmann, 2010] Jens Lehmann. Learning OWL Class Ex-pressions , volume 6 of Studies on the Semantic Web . IOS Press, 2010. [Martins, 2019] Denis Mayr Lima Martins. Reverse engi-neering database queries from examples: State-of-the-art, challenges, and research opportunities. Information Sys-tems , 83:89–100, 2019. [Neider and Gavran, 2018] Daniel Neider and Ivan Gavran. Learning linear temporal properties. In Proceedings of 18th Conference on Formal Methods in Computer Aided Design (FMCAD) , pages 1–10. IEEE, 2018. [Pommellet et al. , 2024] Adrien Pommellet, Daniel Stan, and Simon Scatton. SAT-based learning of computation tree logic. In Proceedings of 12th International Joint Confer-ence on Automated Reasoning (IJCAR) , pages 366–385. Springer, 2024. [Riener, 2019] Heinz Riener. Exact synthesis of LTL prop-erties from traces. In Forum for Specification and Design Languages (FDL 2019) , pages 1–6. IEEE, 2019. [Rizzo et al. , 2020] Giuseppe Rizzo, Nicola Fanizzi, and Claudia d’Amato. Class expression induction as concept space exploration: From DL-FOIL to DL-FOCL. Future Gener. Comput. Syst. , 108:256–272, 2020. [Sinz, 2005] Carsten Sinz. Towards an optimal CNF encoding of boolean cardinality constraints. In Principles and Prac-tice of Constraint Programming - CP 2005, 11th Interna-tional Conference (CP 2005), Proceedings , pages 827–831. Springer, 2005. [Suchanek et al. , 2024] Fabian M. Suchanek, Mehwish Alam, Thomas Bonald, Lihu Chen, Pierre-Henri Paris, and Jules Soria. YAGO 4.5: A large and clean knowledge base with a rich taxonomy. In Proceedings of the 47th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval (SIGIR 2024) , pages 131–140. ACM, 2024. [ten Cate et al. , 2023a] Balder ten Cate, Maurice Funk, Jean Christoph Jung, and Carsten Lutz. Fitting algorithms for conjunctive queries. SIGMOD Rec. , 52(4):6–18, 2023. [ten Cate et al. , 2023b] Balder ten Cate, Maurice Funk, Jean Christoph Jung, and Carsten Lutz. SAT-based PAC learning of description logic concepts. In Proceedings of the Thirty-Second International Joint Conference on Artifi-cial Intelligence (IJCAI 2023) , pages 3347–3355, 2023. [Tran et al. , 2017] An C. Tran, Jens Dietrich, Hans W. Gues-gen, and Stephen Marsland. Parallel symmetric class ex-pression learning. Journal of Machine Learning Research ,18:64:1–64:34, 2017. [Valiant, 1984] Leslie G. Valiant. A theory of the learnable. 

Communications of the ACM , 27(11):1134–1142, 1984. [W3C, 2012] W3C. OWL 2 web ontology language overview. https://www.w3.org/TR/owl2-overview/, 2012. Accessed: July 24, 2025. [Westphal et al. , 2019] Patrick Westphal, Lorenz B ¨uhmann, Simon Bin, Hajira Jabeen, and Jens Lehmann. SML-bench - A benchmarking framework for structured machine learn-ing. Semantic Web , 10(2):231–245, 2019. [Zloof, 1975] Mosh ´e M. Zloof. Query by example. In Ameri-can Federation of Information Processing Societies: 1975 National Computer Conference , volume 44 of AFIPS Con-ference Proceedings , pages 431–438. AFIPS Press, 1975. A Proofs for Section 3 

We give the remaining details for proving Theorems 1 and Theorem 2. We recall first the following characterization of fitting for single individuals [de Rijke, 2000]. 

Lemma 3. Let I be a database and a, b ∈ adom (I). Then there is an ALCQ concept fitting {a}, {b} in I iff I, a ̸ ∼ I, b .

It follows that there is an ALCQ concept fitting P, N in a database I iff I, a ̸ ∼ I, b for every a ∈ P and b ∈ N .For the non-trivial “if”-direction, suppose I, a ̸ ∼ I, b for all 

a ∈ P, b ∈ N and let Cab be the ALCQ concepts witnessing this, that is, a ∈ CIab but b / ∈ CIab , for all a ∈ P, b ∈ N . Then 

# ⊔a∈P ⊓b∈N Cab (1) is an ALCQ concept fitting P, N in I′.Hence, to show Theorem 1 for ALCQ , it suffices to prove the following lemma. It is important to note that we as-sume throughout this section that concepts are represented succinctly , that is, we consider DAG representation which essentially counts the number of non-isomorphic sub-concepts (rather than the number of nodes in the syntax trees). This as-sumption is necessary to get efficient constructions: otherwise it is known that there families of inputs to the fitting prob-lem for which the smallest fitting concepts is of exponential size [Figueira and Gor´ ın, 2010]. 

Lemma 4. There is a polynomial time algorithm that decides, given a database I and a, b ∈ adom (I), whether I, a ∼

I, b . Moreover, in case I, a ̸ ∼ I, b , it outputs the succinct representation of a concept Cab with a ∈ CIab and b / ∈ CIab .Proof. We adapt the partition refinement algorithm that com-putes the maximal ALC bisimulation [Baader et al. , 2017 ] .The algorithm computes a sequence of equivalence relations 

ρ0, ρ 1, . . . on adom (I). It starts with 

ρ0 = {(a, b ) | A(a) ∈ I ⇔ A(b) ∈ I for all A ∈ NC}

To compute ρi+1 from ρi, we rely on the notion of profiles. Let 

a ∈ adom (I), r ∈ NR, and X1, . . . , X m be an enumeration of all equivalence classes of ρi. The r-profile of a in I with respect to ρi is the tuple prof rI (a, ρ i) = ( n1, . . . , n m) where 

ni is the number of r-successors of a in class Xi, that is, 

ni = |succ rI (a) ∩ Xi|. We obtain ρi+1 from ρi be eliminating all pairs (a, b ) ∈ ρi such that prof rI (a, ρ i)̸ = prof rI (b, ρ i), for some r ∈ NR. Clearly, ρi+1 is an equivalence relation as well. By construction, we have ρ0 ⊇ ρ1 ⊇ ρ2 ⊇ . . . . Let ρ∗ be where the sequence stabilizes. 

Claim 1. ρ∗ is an ALCQ bisimulation. 

Proof of Claim 1. By construction, ρ∗ ⊆ ρ0 and hence satisfies the Condition 1 of an ALCQ bisimulation. To see that ρ∗ satisfies Condition 2, let (a, b ) ∈ ρ∗ and take any r ∈

NR. Since (a, b ) was not eliminated, we have prof rI (a, ρ ∗) = 

prof rI (b, ρ ∗). Thus, there is a bijection π between succ rI (a)

and succ rI (b) which preserves ρ∗. It should be clear that for any D ⊆ succ rI (a), the image π(D) ⊆ succ rI (b) witnesses that Condition 2 is satisfied. Condition 3 is analogous. This finishes the proof of Claim 1. 

Claim 2. S ⊆ ρ∗ for any ALCQ bisimulation S on I.

Proof of Claim 2. The proof is by induction on the number of stages of the elimination. In the inductive base, we clearly have S ⊆ ρ0. To see that S ⊆ ρi+1 whenever S ⊆ ρi, take any 

(a, b ) ∈ S and any r ∈ NR. We aim to show that prof rI (a) = 

prof rI (b). So consider any class Xi of ρi. By induction, Xi is a partition of S-equivalence classes Y1, . . . , Y k. Obviously, 

succ rI (a) ∩ Xi =

> k

[

> j=1

(succ rI (a) ∩ Yj ).

Since S satisfies Conditions 2 and 3, we find bijections between succ rI (a) ∩ Yj and succ rI (b) ∩ Yj , for every j ∈{1, . . . , k }. These bijections can be assembled to a bijec-tion between succ rI (a) ∩ Xi and succ rI (b) ∩ Xi, showing that these sets have the same cardinality. Overall, this shows that 

prof rI (a, ρ i) = prof rI (b, ρ i), and hence (a, b ) is not eliminated. This finishes the proof of Claim 2. It is an immediate consequence of Claims 1 and 2 that ρ∗

is the maximal ALCQ bisimulation in I. Moreover, since the size of ρ0 is bounded by |adom (I)|2, in each stage at least one pair is eliminated, and the elimination condition (different profiles for some r) can be decided in polynomial time, the algorithm runs in polynomial time. It remains to argue that, for every eliminated pair (a, b ),we can compute (the representation of) a concept Cab with 

a ∈ CIab , but b / ∈ CIab . We proceed by induction on the number of rounds of the elimination algorithm. In the inductive base, consider any pair (a, b ) /∈ ρ0. Clearly, there is a concept name A ∈ NC such that either A(a) ∈ I,but A(b) /∈ I or A(b) ∈ I, but A(a) /∈ I. Then A or ¬A,respectively, is a fitting concept Cab .In the inductive step, suppose that (a, b ) ∈ ρi \ ρi+1 , that is, (a, b ) got eliminated in round i + 1 . By the elimination condition, we have prof rI (a, ρ i)̸ = prof rI (b, ρ i), for some r ∈

NR. Assume first that there is an equivalence class X of ρi

such that 

|succ rI (a) ∩ X| < |succ rI (b) ∩ X|. (2) By induction, there is a separating concept Cde for every 

d ∈ X, e ∈ X := adom (I) \ X. Consider the concept 

Cab = ( ≤ k r.D X ) where DX is defined by taking: 

DX = ⊔d∈X ⊓

> e∈X

Cde .

It should be clear that a ∈ CIab , but b / ∈ CIab . Moreover, the number of subconcepts of each Cab is polynomial in the size of the input. In the other case, when (2) is true for some X with the roles of a, b switched, we construct in the same way a concept 

Cba with a / ∈ CIba and b ∈ CIba . Then, Cab = ¬Cba is as required. 

Lemma 1. There are polynomial-time reductions from the fitting problem for ALCQI (f ) to that for ALCQ (f ), and from the fitting problem for ALCQ (f ) to that of ALCQ .Proof. The proof of correctness is rather straightforward. We give here only the idea to see that it is also constructive. Input: Database I, examples P, N , integer k ≥ 0 

> 1

S := maximal ALCQ bisimulation on I 

> 2

P ′ := ∅, N ′ := ∅ 

> 3

foreach equivalence class X of S do  

> 4

if |P ∩ X| ≥ | N ∩ X| then  

> 5

P ′ := P ′ ∪ (P ∩ X) 

> 6

else  

> 7

N ′ := N ′ ∪ (N ∩ X) 

> 8

if k ≤ | P ′| + |N ′| then  

> 9

return yes  

> 10

return no 

Algorithm 3: Approximate Fitting in ALCQ .We start with the first reduction. 

(⇒) Let C be an ALCQI (f ) concept C fitting P, N in I.We let C denote the ALCQ (f ) concept obtained from C by replacing any inverse role r− by r. It is routine to verify that 

CI = CJ for every ALCQI (f ) concept C, hence C fits P, N 

in J.

(⇐) Let C be an ALCQ (f ) concept C fitting P, N in J.We let C denote the ALCQI (f ) concept obtained from C by replacing any r by the inverse role r−. Similar as above, we have CJ = CI for every ALCQ (f ) concept C, hence C fits 

P, N in I.Consider now the second reduction. 

(⇒) Let C be an ALCQ (f ) concept C fitting P, N in I.Assume without loss of generality that feature comparisons in C are all of shape (f ≥ v). We let C denote the ALCQ 

concept obtained from C by replacing any feature comparison 

(f ≥ v) by the disjunction of all concepts Af ≥w with w ≥ v.It is routine to verify that CI = CJ for every ALCQ (f )

concept C, hence C fits P, N in J.

(⇐) Let C be an ALCQ concept C fitting P, N in J. We let 

C denote the ALCQ (f ) concept obtained from C by replacing any concept name Af ≥v by the feature comparison (f ≥ v).It is routine to verify that CJ = CI for every ALCQ concept 

C, hence C fits P, N in I.We come now to the proof of Theorem 2. 

Theorem 2. There are polynomial time fitting algorithms for 

ALCQI (f ), ALCQ (f ), ALCQI , ALCQ which always com-pute a concept that fits a maximal overall number of positive and negative examples. Proof. We prove the theorem for ALCQ . It follows for 

ALCQI (f ) via the reduction provided in (the proof of) Lemma 1. The algorithm deciding approximate fitting in 

ALCQ is given in Algorithm 3. Intuitively, it decides for ev-ery equivalence class X of the maximal ALCQ bisimulation 

S in I whether to keep the positive or the negative examples in that class X. Clearly, at all times there is an ALCQ concept fitting P ′, N ′ in I. Hence, if |P ′| + |N ′| is at least k in the end, the input was a yes-instance. The (succinct representation of the) ALCQ concept fitting P ′, N ′ can be computed as in Equation (1) . The algorithm runs in polynomial time since the maximal bisimulation can be computed in polynomial time. 

## B Proofs for Section 4 

Theorem 3. The size-restricted fitting problem for 

ALCQI (f ) is NP -complete. Hardness already holds for inputs I, P, N where I is an {A, r, s }-database for A ∈ NC

and r, s ∈ NR, and P, N are sets with |P | = |N | = 1 .Proof. We give a reduction of hitting set which is the problem to decide, given a collection of sets S = {S1, . . . , S m} and a size bound k ∈ N, whether there exists a set H such that 

|H| ≤ k and H ∩ Sj̸ = ∅, for each j ∈ { 1, . . . , m }. The set 

H is called a hitting set for S. The reduction closely follows the one in the proof of Proposition 1 from [ Funk et al. , 2025 ]for ALC , but its proof of correctness is more difficult due to inverse roles and qualified number restrictions. Let (S, k ) be an instance of hitting set with S =

{S1, . . . , S m} a collection of sets Si ⊆ N and k ∈ N. As-sume without loss of generality that Smj=1 Sj = {1, . . . , n }

for some n ∈ N. We construct a database I in which contains only facts involving two role names r, s and a concept name 

A, and such that there are two elements a, b ∈ adom (I), such that for P = {a}, N = {b}, and k′ = k + n + 2 :

S has a hitting set of size k ⇔

P, N admit an ALCQI (f ) fitting of size k′ in I. (3) We first provide an informal description of I. Its main compo-nents are certain r-paths of length n. The nodes of the paths are groups of k′ + 1 individuals, which we denote with bold face letters a, b, possibly with indices. An r-edge between two groups a1 and a2 indicates r-edges between any a1 and 

a2 with a1 ∈ a1 and a2 ∈ a2. All paths end in a group sat-isfying A. To encode a subset S′ ⊆ { 1, . . . , n }, such a path is extended with additional “detours” along role s. In more detail, suppose such an r-path consists of groups b0, . . . , bn.We encode a subset S′ ⊆ { 1, . . . , n } by including, for all 

i ∈ { 1, . . . , n } \ S′, an s-path of length 2 from bi to bi+1 .The database I consists of • one path for each Sj ∈ S and an additional root b which connects via r to the initial nodes of all the paths; • one additional path that encodes the empty set, and has root a which connects via r to the initial nodes of all paths. Figure 2 illustrates the constructed database for the instance 

(S, 2) where S = {{ 1, 3}, {2, 4}} . The upper path from a0

to a4 is the mentioned path encoding the empty set, the path from b1,0 to b1,4 encodes {1, 3}, and the path from b2,0 to 

b2,4 encodes {2, 4}. For this input, H = {1, 2} is a hitting set of size 2.We now make the definition of I for a given (S, k ) more precise. In the definition below, a fact A(a) means that A(a)

for all a ∈ a, and a fact r(a, b) is an abbreviation for r(a, b ),for all a ∈ a, b ∈ b. The domain of I is given as follows: 

adom (I) = {a} ∪ { ai, a′ 

> i

| 0 ≤ i ≤ n} ∪ {bj,i , b′ 

> j,i

| 1 ≤ j ≤ m, 0 ≤ i ≤ n}.a a0 a1

a′

> 1

a′

> 2

a′

> 2

a3

a′

> 3

a4

A

a′

> 4

r

> s

r

> s
> s

r

> s
> s

r

> s
> s
> s

b

b1,0

b2,0

b′

> 2,1

b1,1

b2,1

b′

> 1,2

b1,2

b2,2

b′

> 2,3

b1,3

b2,3

b′

> 1,4

b1,4

A

b2,4

A

r

r

r

> s

r

> s

r r

> s

r

r

> s
> s
> s

r

> s

r

> s

r  

> r
> r
> Figure 2: Example database Iused in the reduction.

The A-facts mark the end of the paths: 

A(an) and A(bj,n ), for all j ∈ m.The r-facts can be grouped as follows: • r(a, a0), r (a, bj, 0), and r(b, bj, 0), connect the root ele-ments a, b to the starts of the paths; • r(ai−1, ai) for all i ∈ { 1, . . . , n } establish the path along the a-elements; and • r(bj,i −1, bj,i ) for all i ∈ {1, . . . , n } and j ∈{1, . . . , m } establish the paths for representing the sets in S.The s-facts are given as follows: • s(ai−1, a′

> i

), s (a′

> i

, ai), for all i ∈ { 1, . . . , n }, describes the s-detours along the a-path; • s(bj,i −1, b′

> j,i

), s (b′

> j,i

, bj,i ) for all j ∈ { 1, . . . , m } and all i ∈ { 1, . . . , n } with i / ∈ Sj , describes the s-detours along the b-paths. We pick some a ∈ a and some b ∈ b as single positive and negative examples, respectively, that is, P = {a}, N = {b}.In our proof below, we will use the following properties of I:(P1) The individuals in any group a∗/b∗ (are ALCQI -bisimilar and thus) satisfy the same ALCQI concepts. Hence, the following equivalences holds for every role or inverse role R and any ALCQI concept E:

(∃R. ⊤ ⊓ ∀ R.E )I = ( ∃R.E )I .

(¬∃ R. ⊤ ⊓ ∀ R.E )I = ⊤I .

(P2) Since every group contains k′ + 1 individuals, the follow-ing equivalences hold for any number 1 ≤ M ≤ k′, any role or inverse role R, and any ALCQI concept E:

(≥ M R.E )I = ( ≥ 1 R.E )I

(≤ M R.E )I = ( ≤ 0 R.E )I

Recall that the concepts on the right-hand side are equiv-alent to ∃R.E and ∀R. ¬E, respectively. We call a concept of shape ∃w1. . . . ∃wm.A for 

w1, . . . , w m ∈ { r, s } a path concept . We verify Equiva-lence (3) by showing that the following are equivalent: (i) S has a hitting set of size at most k;(ii) there is a path concept of shape ∃r.D and of size at most 

k′ fitting P, N in I;(iii) there is an ALCQI (f ) concept of size at most k′ fitting 

P, N in I;(iv) there is an ALCI concept of size at most k′ fitting P, N 

in I;(v) there is an ALCI concept of size at most k′ and of shape 

∃r.D fitting P, N in I.We show (i) ⇒(ii), then the chain (ii) ⇒(iii) ⇒(iv) ⇒(v) ⇒(ii), the first of which is trivially true, and finally (ii) ⇒(i). 

Claim 1. Implication (i) ⇒(ii) holds. 

Proof of Claim 1. Let H be a hitting set for S = {S1, . . . , S m}

with |H| = k. We inductively define path concepts Ci, for 

i = 0 , . . . , n , by setting C0 = A and 

Ci =

∃r.C i−1 if n − i + 1 /∈ H

∃s. ∃s.C i−1 otherwise , (4) for 1 ≤ i ≤ n. Thus, ∥Cn∥ = n + |H| + 1 and therefore 

∥∃ r.C n∥ = n + k + 2 = k′. We claim that D = ∃r.C n fits 

P, N in I. In the example in Figure 2, the concept constructed for the hitting set H = {1, 2} is 

D = ∃r. ∃s. ∃s. ∃s. ∃s. ∃r. ∃r.A, 

and it is easily verified that it fits. In general, any path concept E that can be obtained this way satisfies a ∈ EI . Moreover, since D is constructed from a hitting set H, the construction forces the path described by 

E to “leave” the paths encoding the sets Sj in I. This means that b cannot be in DI . This finishes the proof of Claim 1. 

Claim 2. Implication (iii) ⇒(iv) holds. 

Proof of Claim 2. Let C be an ALCQI (f ) concept of size at most k′ that fits P, N in I. Since I does not use feature names, it is without loss of generality to assume that C is actually an ALCQI concept. Then the claim is an immediate consequence of Property (P2) and the observation that there cannot occur any numbers greater than k′ in C, as it is only of size k′. Here we rely on the fact that we consider unary coding. This finishes the proof of Claim 2. 

Claim 3. Implication (iv) ⇒(v) holds. 

Proof of Claim 3. Let C be a minimal ALCI concept that fits 

P, N in I. We assume without loss of generality that C is in negation normal form. We first observe that C is neither a conjunction nor a disjunction: • If C is a conjunction C1 ⊓ C2, then one of C1, C 2 fits 

P, N as well since there is a single negative example. This is in contradiction to minimality of C.• If C is a disjunction C1 ⊔C2, then one of C1, C 2 fits P, N 

as well since there is a single positive example. This is in contradiction to minimality of C.Hence, C is either a concept name A, a negated concept name 

¬A, or of shape (∃r.D ) or (∀r.D ); existential or value restric-tions involving s or inverse roles cannot fit. The first two cases are not possible since neither A nor ¬A fit. It remains to note that ∀r.D cannot fit P, N in I, since the construction of I

implies that a ∈ (∀r.D )I implies b ∈ (∀r.D )I .

Claim 4. Implication (v) ⇒(ii) holds. 

Proof of Claim 4. We need some auxiliary notation. For a finite sequence w = r1 · · · rm ∈ { r, s }∗, we abbreviate with ∃w.C 

the concept ∃r1. . . . . ∃rm.C . Moreover, for a0 ∈ adom (I),we let RIw(a0) denote the set of all b ∈ adom (I) such that 

(a0, b ) ∈ rI 

> 1

◦ . . . ◦ rIm, where ◦ denotes the composition of binary relations. Let now be C = ∃r.D be a minimal ALCI concept fitting 

P, N in I. We inductively construct concepts of shape C1 =

∃w1.D 1, C2 = ∃w2.D 2, . . . such that each Ci fits P, N in I,is of size at most k′, and 1. RIwi (a) contains a single group aj or a′ 

> j

and each indi-vidual in this group satisfies Di;2. no element from RIwi (b) satisfies Di.In the inductive base, we set w1 = r and D1 = D. Clearly, Properties 1 and 2 are satisfied by this choice. For the inductive step, take any Ci = ∃wi.D i and assume that Di is minimal with all the properties. We observe first that it is without loss of generality that Di is not a disjunction. Indeed, if Di = E1 ⊔ E2, then one of ∃wi.E 1, ∃wi.E 2 fits 

P, N as well, still satisfies Properties 1 and 2, and is smaller than Di. This is in contradiction with the minimality of Di.We investigate now closer the shape of Di, which is a con-junction of M ≥ 1 concepts E1, . . . , E M :• If some Ei = ¬A, then RIwi (a) does not contain an.This means that also bj,n /∈ RIwi (b) for any j. Then, we can replace Ei with ⊤.• If M = 1 and E1 = ⊤, we are done. • There cannot be a conjunct of shape ∃r−.E (resp., 

(∃s−.E )) as such conjunct implies that the last element of the sequence is r (resp., s). But then we can remove 

∃r−.E (resp., ∃s−.E ) and make E a conjunct of the previous Di−1, resulting in a smaller concept. • There cannot be a conjunct of shape ∀r−.E (resp., 

(∀s−.E )) as such conjunct implies that the last element of the sequence is r (resp., s). But then we can remove 

∀r−.E (resp., ∀s−.E ) and make E a conjunct of the previous Di−1, resulting in a smaller concept. • If Ej = A for some j, then RIwi (a) contains an. But an

do not satisfy any concept of shape ∃r.E or ∃s.E , hence those cannot be conjuncts. Further, an trivially satisfies concepts ∀r.E and ∀s.E , so they are not there (due to minimality). Hence, A is the only conjunct and we are done. • By Property (P1), we can replace ∀r.E/ ∀s.E by 

∃r.E/ ∃s.E or ⊤, depending whether the group from Property 1 has an r/s -successor or not. • There cannot be two different conjuncts ∃r.E, ∃r.E ′

since they can be replaced by the shorter ∃r. (E ⊓ E′).The same for s.• If there is a single conjunct E1 = ∃t.E ′ 

> 1

for t ∈ { r, s },we can just extend wi with t, that is, wi+1 = wit and set 

Di+1 = D′

> i

.• It remains to consider the case that Di is of shape ∃r.F 1 ⊓∃s.F 2. We distinguish cases on the shape of the group from Property 1. 

– If aℓ ∈ RIwi (a), for some ℓ, then we can replace Di

with ∃s. ∃s.F 1. This is clearly satisfied in aℓ. More-over, in this case, groups in RIwi (b) are of shape 

bj,ℓ , and none of them satisfies ∃s. ∃s.F 1, by the assumption that they do not satisfy ∃r.F 1 ⊓ ∃ s.F 2.Thus Properties 1 and 2 are preserved. 

– If a′ 

> ℓ

∈ RIwi (a), for some ℓ, then we get a contra-diction, since a′ 

> ℓ

does not have an r-successor and hence does not satisfy ∃r.F 1.This finishes the proof of Claim 4. 

Claim 5. Implication (ii) ⇒(i) holds. 

Proof of Claim 5. We use again the notation from the previous claim. Let C = ∃r. ∃w.D be a path concept fitting P, N in I.We start with making two observations on the shape of C:• C is of shape ∃r. ∃w.A for some w: the only other option 

D = ⊤ is impossible since b ∈ (∃r. ∃w. ⊤)I .• w ∈ (r + ss )+ since this is the only way to ”reach” an

from a. Moreover, due to the size bound ∥C∥ ≤ k′ =

n + k + 2 , the pattern ss occurs at most k times in w.Due to the second item above we can write w = w1 . . . w n

with wi ∈ { r, ss } for all i and such that wi = ss at most k

times. We read off a hitting set H of size at most k from C by taking 

H = {i ∈ { 1, . . . , n } | wi = ss }

We have to show H ∩ Si̸ = ∅, for every j. Suppose, with the goal of deriving a contradiction, that H ∩Sj = ∅. Then, by the construction of I, we have bj, 0 ∈ (∃w.A )I . Hence, b ∈ CI

and b is not a negative example, contradiction. This finishes the proof of the last claim and hence of the theorem. 

Theorem 4. Let g ∈ Ω( k) ∩ O(2 p(k)) for some polynomial p.Then Algorithm 2 is a complete Occam algorithm. Proof. Let g ∈ Ω( k) ∩ O(2 p(k)) and let Ag be Algorithm 2 where g is used to increase values in number restrictions. We seek to bound the VC-dimension of the hypothesis space 

HAg (Σ , s, m ) by p(s, |Σ|)mα and start with some observa-tions about HAg (Σ , s, m ). Let Σ be any signature, s, m ∈ N

and CT with ∥CT ∥ ≤ s be any target concept. When Ag

is started on m examples it proceeds by increasing the con-cept size k incrementally, in each step searching for a fitting 

ALCQ kg(k) concept, that is, an ALCQ concept whose syntax tree has k nodes and the value of a number restriction appear-ing in C is bounded by g(k). Because of g ∈ Ω( k) Algorithm 

Ag is complete. Since we assume unary coding of values in number restrictions the maximal value of a number restriction that appears in CT is bounded by s. Thus if Ag is started on examples P and N so that CT fits P, N and k reaches a value that satisfies k ≥ s and g(k) ≥ s it returns a fitting concept 

D with ∥D∥ ≤ s, possibly D = CT . Indeed, Algorithm 

Ag necessarily terminates after the minimal value for k with 

g(k) ≥ s and k ≥ s is reached. This allows us to bound the effective hypothesis space HAg (Σ , s, m ) by 

|H Ag (Σ , s, m )| ≤ (|Σ| + g(k∗) + c)k∗

where k∗ is some value with g(k∗) ≥ s and k∗ ≥ s to be determined later. Let d be the VC-dimension of |H Ag (Σ , s, m )|. Since 2d

concepts are required to shatter a set of examples of cardinality 

d we have 

2d ≤ |H Ag (Σ , s, m )| ≤ (|Σ| + g(k∗ + c)k∗

and thus 

d ≤ log(( |Σ| + g(k∗) + c)k∗

)= k∗ log( |Σ| + g(k∗) + c)

≤ k∗ log( |Σ|g(k∗)c)= k∗(log( |Σ|c) + log( g(k∗)))) 

≤ k∗c′|Σ| + k∗ log( g(k∗)) 

(for an appropriate constant c’) Because of g ∈ Ω( k) ∩ O(2 p(k)) there are constants c1 ∈

(0 , 1] , c 2 ≥ 1 and k′

> 1

, k ′ 

> 2

> 0 so that g(k) ≥ c1k for all k ≥ k′

> 1

,

g(k) ≥ c1k and for all k ≥ k′

> 2

, g (k) ≤ c22p(k). W.l.o.g. we show the polynomial bound required for an Occam algorithm only for s ≥ max {k′

> 1

, k ′

> 2

} as we can account for any smaller 

s by an appropriately chosen constant in the polynomial. We set k∗ = sc1 , ensuring g(k∗) ≥ s and k∗ ≥ s. Because of 

g ∈ O(2 p(k)) we have 

k∗c′|Σ| + k∗ log( g(k∗)) 

≤ sc1

c′|Σ| + sc1

log( c22p( sc1 ))

≤ sc1

c′|Σ| + sc1

log( c2) + sc1

p( sc1

) log(2) .

Let Af be the algorithm obtained by first applying the re-duction of fitting in ALC (f ) to fitting in ALC from Lemma 1 and then applying bounded fitting (for ALC ) to the result. 

Theorem 5. Algorithm Af is not an Occam algorithm. 

Intuitively, the hypothesis space HAf (Σ , s, m ) contains all concepts of the form (f = j) for j ∈ dom (f ). It is then possible to construct a set of examples, so that any subset is identified uniquely by a a concept of the form ∃r. (f = j),thus the set is shattered by these concepts. Note that to show this for a set of examples of cardinality exponential in s we also require an exponential number of r-successors, making use of unbounded outdegree in databases. To prove Theorem 5 we rely on Theorem 3.2.1 from [ Blumer et al. , 1989 ], that is, every Occam algorithm defines a sample-efficient PAC learning algorithm, and thus prove the stronger statement, that 

Af is not a sample-efficient PAC-learning algorithm. Note, that we use a different but equivalent notion of examples here that is more natural when studying PAC learnability. We define an example as a pair (I, a ) of database I and individual 

a ∈ adom (I). A concept C fits (P, N ) if a ∈ CI for all 

(I, a ) ∈ P and a / ∈ CI for all (I, a ) ∈ N . In addition we require the definition of the error of two concepts as follows. Given a probability distribution P on examples and concepts 

C and D the error error P(C, D ) from C to D w.r.t. P is the probability to draw an example (I, a ) with a ∈ CI ∆DI , that is error P(CT , C ) = P({(I, a ) | a ∈ CI ∆DI }).

Definition 2. A sample-efficient PAC learning algorithm is a fitting algorithm associated with a polynomial m : (0 , 1) ×

(0 , 1) × N → N so that for all finite signatures Σ, probability distributions P on examples over Σ, ε, δ ∈ (0 , 1) , s ∈ N, and concepts CT with ∥CT ∥ ≤ s: if A is run on a sample P, N 

of m( 1 

> δ

, 1 

> ε

, s ) examples drawn according to P then it returns with probability at least 1 − δ a concept C that fits P, N and satisfies error P(CT , C ) ≤ ε.

Theorem 7. Algorithm Af is not a sample-efficient PAC learn-ing Algorithm. Proof. Assume that Algorithm Af is a sample-efficient PAC learning algorithm with associated polynomial m. Let Σ = 

{r, f } with, dom (f ) = N, CT = ∃ts.⊤, δ = ε = 12 . Let s

be large enough, so that m( 1 

> ε

, 1 

> δ

, s ) ≤ 2s−1. We construct sets of positive and negative examples to be assigned non-zero probability and show that if Af is started on a sample of m( 1 

> ε

, 1 

> δ

, s ) examples, then with probability 1 − δ it re-turns a concept C with error P(CT , C ) > ε . To define our examples, let g : {2i | 1 ≤ i ≤ 22s

} → 2{1,..., 2s} be any bijective function. Consider the set of positive examples 

P = {(I1, a 1), . . . , (I2s , a 2s )} where each example (Ii, a i)

is obtained by adding 1. a ts-path outgoing from ai,2. for all j ∈ { 1, . . . , 22s+1 } so that i ∈ g(j) and |g(j)| ≤ 

2s−1 an r-edge from ai to an element aj with f (aj , j ) ∈

Ii and The set of negative examples is obtained as N = {(J, b )}

where for each j ∈ { 2i − 1 | 0 ≤ i ≤ 22s

+ 2 } the database 

J contains an r-edge to an individual bj with f (bj , j ) ∈ J.We define P to be the probability distribution that assigns 

P(I, a ) = 12s+1 to each positive example (I, a ) and P(J, b ) =  

> 12

. Now, let (P ′, N ′) be sets of positive and negative examples obtained from a sample of m( 1 

> ε

, 1 

> δ

, s ) examples drawn accord-ing to P. We have |P ′| < 2s−1 because of m( 1 

> ε

, 1 

> δ

, s ) < 2s−1.We may assume (J, b ) ∈ N ′ as the probability that this is the case is 1 − ( 12s+1 )s ≥ 12 = δ. Observe that the following holds for any such (P ′, N ′).1. There is no j so that the concept ∃r. (f ▷◁ j ) with ▷◁ ∈{≤ , ≥} fits P ′, N ′.2. The concept ∃r. (( f ≤ j) ⊓ (f ≥ j)) where j is uniquely determined by g(j) = {i | (Ii, a i) ∈ P ′} fits P ′, N ′.3. For any concept of the form C = ∃r. (( f ≤ j) ⊓ (f ≥ j)) 

that fits P ′, N ′:

|{ (I, a ) ∈ P | a / ∈ CI }| ≥ 2s−1Carcinogenesis Hepatitis Lymphography Mammographic Mutagenesis Nctrer Premierleague Pyrimidine                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          

> ⊤
> 0.55 ±0.00 0.41 ±0.00 0.57 ±0.00 0.46 ±0.00 0.33 ±0.00 0.59 ±0.00 0.50 ±0.00 0.50 ±0.00 1.00 ±0.00 1.00 ±0.00 1.00 ±0.00 1.00 ±0.00 1.00 ±0.00 1.00 ±0.00 1.00 ±0.00 1.00 ±0.00 0.71 ±0.00 0.58 ±0.00 0.73 ±0.00 0.63 ±0.00 0.50 ±0.00 0.74 ±0.00 0.67 ±0.00 0.67 ±0.00
> EvoLearner
> 0.56 ±0.03 0.77 ±0.10 0.82 ±0.09 0.80 ±0.05 1.00 ±0.00 1.00 ±0.00 1.00 ±0.00 0.93 ±0.12 5.50 ±1.51 4.50 ±1.35 17 .40 ±9.03 3.20 ±1.48 3.00 ±0.00 2.40 ±0.97 5.00 ±0.94 6.40 ±1.26 0.71 ±0.01 0.77 ±0.07 0.84 ±0.08 0.78 ±0.05 1.00 ±0.00 1.00 ±0.00 1.00 ±0.00 0.91 ±0.14
> TDL
> 0.58 ±0.09 0.84 ±0.05 0.80 ±0.12 0.60 ±0.05 0.86 ±0.15 1.00 ±0.00 0.68 ±0.17 0.82 ±0.26 879 .60 ±132 .97 1436 .80 ±46 .49 112 .10 ±23 .33 5780 .70 ±302 .98 26 .50 ±8.92 2.00 ±0.00 298 .40 ±35 .22 15 .90 ±3.78 0.62 ±0.07 0.83 ±0.05 0.82 ±0.11 0.69 ±0.03 0.78 ±0.31 1.00 ±0.00 0.47 ±0.37 0.82 ±0.24
> Algorithm 3
> 0.59 ±0.06 0.62 ±0.05 0.73 ±0.13 0.78 ±0.04 1.00 ±0.00 0.99 ±0.02 1.00 ±0.00 0.93 ±0.12 4715 .60 ±455 .32 53269 .80 ±1549 .82 330 .80 ±18 .98 1925 .40 ±72 .76 1.00 ±0.00 64 .20 ±5.35 23 .40 ±1.26 60 .80 ±3.94 0.56 ±0.06 0.53 ±0.06 0.74 ±0.13 0.76 ±0.05 1.00 ±0.00 0.99 ±0.02 1.00 ±0.00 0.90 ±0.16
> Our Tool
> 0.70 ±0.10 0.84 ±0.03 0.80 ±0.09 0.83 ±0.04 0.97 ±0.11 1.00 ±0.00 0.97 ±0.05 0.95 ±0.11 6.00 ±0.00 5.00 ±0.00 10 .00 ±0.00 9.10 ±0.32 1.00 ±0.00 2.00 ±0.00 2.00 ±0.00 5.90 ±0.32 0.73 ±0.10 0.81 ±0.03 0.83 ±0.08 0.81 ±0.05 0.90 ±0.32 1.00 ±0.00 0.97 ±0.05 0.95 ±0.12

Table 4: Accuracies (first line), concept sizes (second line) and F1-scores (third line) of concept learning implementations on the SML-benchmarks. Timeout of 5min 

w Mammographic Carcinogenesis Lymphography 

1 21.5 341.5 51.8 2 11.2 173 30.8 4 6.8 113.3 21.5 8 5.8 99.6 19.6 Table 5: Running times of bounded fitting up to size 8 with number of worker threads w. Average of 3 runs. 

It follows from Points 1. and 2. that if Af is started on P ′, N ′

it returns a concept of the form C = ∃r. (( f ≤ j) ⊓ (f ≥ j)) .Point 3. then implies that error P(CT , C ) > 12 .

Theorem 6. Algorithm Af is an Occam Algorithm if input databases have bounded outdegree or bounded domains. Proof. We begin with the second part, that Af is an Occam Algorithm if input databases have bounded domains. If there is a bounded number of values for each feature then the number of new concept names that the reduction of from Lemme 1 introduces is bounded in the same way. Thus we deal with a finite number of concept names. It then follows from the proof of Theorem 4 of [ ten Cate et al. , 2023b ] that Algorithm Af is an Occam algorithm. For the first part of the statement, let Af,ℓ be Algorithm Af

obtained by bounding outdegree in interpretations by ℓ. We require the following two definitions. For a set of examples E

let reach-val fs (E) be the set of all values for f appearing in E

at depth at most s. |reach-val fs (E)| ≤ | E|ℓs. Let val f (C) be the set of all values for f appearing in C.Let Σ be any signature, s, m ≥ 1 and CT be any tar-get concept with ∥C∥ ≤ s. For a set of examples E let 

HAf,ℓ 

E (Σ , s, m ) be the set of all concepts from HAf,ℓ (Σ , s, m )

that only use feature values f ▷◁ v with v ∈ reach-val fs (E).Since any concept C ∈ H Af,ℓ (Σ , s, m ) has size at most 

∥C∥ ≤ s, it follows that 

|H Af,ℓ 

E (Σ , s, m )| ≤ (|Σ| + c + |Σ|lsm)s (5) for some constant c that accounts for operators. Now, let d be the VC-dimension of HAf,ℓ (Σ , s, m ) and let E with |E| = d

and C ⊆ H Af,ℓ (Σ , s, m ) with |C| = 2 d w.l.o.g. be a set of examples and a set of concepts, respectively, such that E is shattered by C. Because of |C| = 2 d we have that for any 

C1, C 2 ∈ C with C1̸ = C2:

CI

1 ∩ E̸ = CI

2 ∩ E. (6) 

Claim: There is a set C′ ⊆ H Af,ℓ 

E (Σ , s, m ) with |C ′| = 2 d

that shatters E.For C ∈ C , let C′ be C with all subconcepts f ▷◁ v of 

C with f ∈ ΣF , ▷◁ ∈ {≤ , ≥} , v /∈ reach-val fs (E) replaced by f ▷◁ v ′ where in case of ▷◁ =≤, v ′ is the largest element of reach-val fs (E) with v′ ≤ v and in case of ▷◁ =≥, v ′ is the smallest element of reach-val fs (E) with v′ ≥ v. Define 

g : C → H Af,ℓ 

E (Σ , s, m ) by g(C) = C′. Then, 1. g(C) ⊆ H Af,ℓ 

E (Σ , s, m ), that is, g is well-defined. This follows immediately from the construction of C′ as in C′

all values for feature restrictions appear in E.2. For any a ∈ E : a ∈ CI ⇔ a ∈ C′I . This follows from the construction of C′.3. C′ = g(C) shatters E, an immediate consequence of Point 2 and that C shatters E.4. g is injective and consequently |C ′| = 2 d.To see that Point 4. holds, assume g is not injective, that is, there are C1, C 2, D with g(C1) = g(C2) = D. Point 2. then implies CI

1 ∩ E = CI

2 ∩ E, a contradiction to Equation (6). From the Claim and Equation (5) we obtain 

2d ≤ |H Af,ℓ 

E (Σ , s, m )| ≤ (|Σ| + c + |Σ|lsm)s

and thus 

d ≤ log(( |Σ| + c + |Σ|lsm)s)= s log( |Σ| + c + |Σ|lsm)

≤ s log(2 |Σ|cl sm)= s(log(2 |Σ|c) + log( ls) + log( m))) 

≤ | Σ|c′s2√m (for an appropriate constant c′)C Additional Experiment Data 

We give the remaining results for generalization on the SML-Benchmarks that were omitted in the main part in Table 4. Further results regarding parallelization are given in Table 5.