Title: Explainable AI Isn't Enough! Rethinking Algorithmic Contestability

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.16041v1

Published Time: Mon, 18 May 2026 01:08:33 GMT

Number of Pages: 19

Markdown Content:
# Explainable AI Isn’t Enough! Rethinking Algorithmic Contestability 

# Timo Freiesleben 1,2,3 , Kristof Meding 4,5 , Gunnar K¨ onig 4,6 

> 1

LMU Munich, Germany 

> 2

Munich Center for Machine Learning (MCML) 

> 3

Munich Center for Mathematical Philosophy (MCMP) 

> 4

University of T¨ ubingen, Germany  

> 5

CZS Institute for Artificial Intelligence and Law 

> 6

T¨ ubingen AI Center timo.freiesleben@lmu.de 

Abstract 

Machine learning systems increasingly make life-changing decisions about individuals, such as loan approvals, hir-ing, and cheating detection, raising a pressing question: how can individuals respond to negative decisions made by these opaque systems? While explainable artificial in-telligence (XAI) has largely focused on algorithmic re-course—helping individuals change their features to obtain a desired outcome—the parallel problem of algorithmic con-testability—helping individuals review and correct erroneous algorithmic decisions—has received far less attention, despite its central ethical and legal importance. We trace this neglect to the absence of clear formal definitions and a systematic operationalization of contestability as an algorithmic prob-lem. To address it, we propose an operational definition of contestability as a natural complement to recourse: contesta-bility starts from the presumption that a decision may be in-correct and focuses on identifying evidence to challenge and potentially overturn it, whereas recourse assumes the deci-sion is valid and instead provides pathways for changing it. We show that standard XAI explanations, such as counter-factuals, LIME, or Anchors, even when combined with hu-man intuitions about decision continuity or monotonicity, re-veal only errors in the neighborhood of the individual, but provide insufficient grounds for overturning the decision at hand. Going thus beyond traditional XAI, we identify three types of evidence warranting reversal according to the deci-sion maker’s own ethical standards: predictive multiplicity, incorrect feature values, and neglected overruling evidence. We argue that these render decisions normatively indefen-sible and thus successfully contestable. Finally, we analyze how existing EU legislation connects to our framework and argue that individuals already hold some legal rights to these forms of evidence. 

# 1 Introduction 

Machine learning systems increasingly make life-changing decisions about individuals. They influence whether laypeo-ple receive loans, whether applicants are invited to job inter-views, or even whether students are accused of cheating on an exam. Seeing one’s life placed in the hands of an opaque algorithm can make people feel powerless: What can they do when confronted with an unfavorable decision? Explainable artificial intelligence has long been moti-vated, at least in part, by the aim of restoring the agency of individuals who face unfavorable algorithmic decisions (Lipton 2018; Wachter, Mittelstadt, and Russell 2017). Fa-mously, algorithmic recourse explanations have been pro-posed to recommend actionable steps, e.g., paying off out-standing loans, that enable individuals to reverse an unfavor-able decision. Another proposed way to restore individuals’ agency is to provide them with grounds for contesting ad-verse decisions, that is, to provide individuals with informa-tion to review the decision-making process and intervene in situations where they feel judged incorrectly or unfairly. For example, individuals may contest a rejected credit applica-tion if their rejection was based on living in a neighborhood with high loan default rates; whether the contestation is suc-cessful and leads to a reversal of the decision is then subject to a negotiation process. While the literature on algorithmic recourse has become a cornerstone of XAI research, with both solid conceptual as well as algorithmic foundations (Ustun, Spangher, and Liu 2019; Venkatasubramanian and Alfano 2020; K¨ onig, Freiesleben, and Grosse-Wentrup 2023), the literature on al-gorithmic contestability has remained comparatively under-explored. This is striking given contestability arguably has at least as great ethical and legal importance as algorith-mic recourse (Selbst and Barocas 2018; Lyons, Velloso, and Miller 2021; Bayamlıo˘ glu 2022). The reasons for this dis-parity are undoubtedly multifaceted: contestability is deeply intertwined with legal questions that vary across jurisdic-tions; technical researchers may feel uncomfortable engag-ing with legal concepts; and decision makers often have little incentive to provide individuals with evidence that could be used to challenge their decisions. However, we believe there is a more fundamental reason why contestability has been largely neglected as an algorithmic problem: the absence of clear formal definitions and a systematic operationalization of contestability itself. The goal of this paper is to provide precisely these. We conceptualize algorithmic contestability as the coun-terpart to algorithmic recourse, with both approaches ulti-mately aimed at helping individuals achieve their desired outcomes (Section 3). In the context of recourse, individ-uals trust the correctness of the model’s decision and use recourse recommendations to obtain the desired outcome. That is, they believe that the decision about the individ-ual (e.g., loan rejection) aligns with the true state (i.e., the loan would not be repaid) and the recourse explanation pro-

> arXiv:2605.16041v1 [stat.ML] 15 May 2026

vides information that enables them to change both the de-cision and the true state, that is, the loan is approved and ultimately repaid. Algorithmic contestability takes the op-posite perspective: the individual maintains that the decision (e.g., loan rejection) is not aligned with the true state (i.e., the loan would have been repaid) and therefore seeks infor-mation that allows them to alter the decision to match the true state, so that they receive the loan. We show that common XAI methods, such as counterfac-tual explanations (Wachter, Mittelstadt, and Russell 2017), Local Interpretable Model-Agnostic Explanations (LIME) (Ribeiro, Singh, and Guestrin 2016), and Anchors (Ribeiro, Singh, and Guestrin 2018), are of limited value for algorith-mic contestability. While they can reveal conflicts with hu-man intuitions concerning continuity and monotonicity, and thereby point to errors somewhere in the individual’s neigh-borhood, they do not provide sufficient grounds to overturn a decision (Section 4). As a response, we move beyond XAI and investigate other types of evidence that can enable con-testability from a normative perspective , that is, evidence that should lead decision makers to change their decision according to their own ethical norms (Section 5). The three types of evidence are 1. Predictive multiplicity : conflicting predictions for the individual from a set of models with equal empirical and theoretical support; 2. Incorrect feature val-ues: wrong information about the individual that if corrected would lead to a different decision; 3. Neglected overruling evidence: evidence about other features of the individual that if taken into account would overturn the decision. We show that these forms of evidence can be sufficient to alter algo-rithmic decisions on normative grounds. We conclude by in-terpreting the European General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) in light of our framework and argue that individuals already possess rights to these forms of evidence under the existing legislative landscape Section 6. 

# 2 Related work 

Contestability is a core ethical requirement in algorithmic decision-making and, consequently, a central element in sev-eral worldwide legislations (Vaccaro et al. 2019; Maxwell and Dumas 2023). For example, it is one of the eight guiding principles of Australia’s AI Ethics Framework (Department of Industry, Innovation and Science 2019), lies at the “heart of legal rights that afford individuals access to personal data and insight into decision-making processes” (Mulligan, Kluttz, and Kohli 2019), and constitutes the “backbone” of the widely discussed Article 22 of the GDPR (Bayamlıo˘ glu 2022). The goals and nature of contestability are, however, multifaceted and often debated, which makes both its legal and technical implementation challenging (Lyons, Velloso, and Miller 2021). It is widely agreed that algorithmic con-testability remains under-researched, especially from a tech-nical perspective (Lyons, Velloso, and Miller 2021; Alfrink et al. 2023; Maxwell and Dumas 2023; Yurrita et al. 2025). Henin and Le M´ etayer (2021) provide a norm-based for-mal framework of contestability that allows decisions to be contested by reference to norms and justifications. Their for-mal model, Algocate , provides an interactive tool for gen-erating evidence in favor of and against a decision. While their idea of building upon norms and justifications is con-ceptually sound (Aler Tubella et al. 2020), their technical framework is difficult to implement in practice: it requires a complete logical specification of decision norms as well as an ordering relation over argument strengths. More recently, Moreira et al. (2025) attempted to formalize contestability in a comparatively broad sense, encompassing the facilita-tion of risk analysis, the assurance of accountability, and the enablement of decision reversal. Unlike this work, we focus exclusively on contestability to enable decision reversal and provide a concrete framework together with workable defi-nitions for this specific scenario. Since we narrow our focus to enabling decision reversal through contestability, we ab-stract away from other aspects in the construction of algo-rithmic systems that may be contestable (Hirsch et al. 2017; Sarra 2020; Alfrink et al. 2023; Yurrita et al. 2025). While providing individuals with grounds to contest in-dividual decisions is often cited as a central motivation of the field of explainable artificial intelligence (XAI) (Ribeiro, Singh, and Guestrin 2016; Lipton 2018; Adadi and Berrada 2018; Molnar 2020), only very few technical works ad-dress contestability in greater detail (Mansi, Karusala, and Riedl 2025). One notable exception is the work on coun-terfactual explanations by Wachter, Mittelstadt, and Russell (2017). However, while Wachter, Mittelstadt, and Russell (2017) motivate why counterfactuals can enable individuals to contest decisions and satisfy the legal requirements es-tablished by the GDPR, they do not demonstrate how their method can be tailored to this purpose, nor under which con-ditions contestation based on counterfactuals should be suc-cessful. Other explanation methods, such as LIME or Shap-ley values, are also commonly discussed as potentially fos-tering contestability (Mulligan, Kluttz, and Kohli 2019; Yur-rita et al. 2023). Many ethical and legal scholars argue that XAI could serve as an “enabler for contestability” (Selbst and Barocas 2018; Lyons, Velloso, and Miller 2021; Vre-denburgh 2022; Maxwell and Dumas 2023; Schmude et al. 2025). Yet, they often remain vague about how exactly XAI facilitates such contestation. The most detailed account is offered by Selbst and Barocas (2018), who argue that ex-planations must be paired with human intuitions to support contestability. However, as we will demonstrate, the insights that common XAI methods provide into the (in)correctness of decisions are quite limited, even when individuals ac-tively draw on their own intuitions. A closely related problem to algorithmic contestability is the problem of algorithmic recourse (Ustun, Spangher, and Liu 2019). Both algorithmic recourse and contestability aim to reverse decisions; however, in recourse, the individual perceives the decision as correct, whereas in contestability, it is perceived as incorrect (Venkatasubramanian and Alfano 2020). The recourse literature has evolved significantly over the years (Karimi et al. 2022), with work investigating the robustness (Upadhyay, Joshi, and Lakkaraju 2021; K¨ onig et al. 2025), fairness (Von K¨ ugelgen et al. 2022), and privacy risks (Pawelczyk, Lakkaraju, and Neel 2023) of recourse. We hope that our definitions and operationalizations of al-gorithmic contestability will enable a similar formal treat-ment of contestability, allowing many ideas and methods to be transferred and ultimately placing algorithmic contesta-bility on equal footing with algorithmic recourse. 

# 3 From algorithmic decision-making to algorithmic contestability 

Algorithmic decision-making is characterized by a few core components. Individuals possess unobserved properties that decision makers would like to know, but that are difficult or sometimes impossible to measure directly. For example, in lending, credit institutions want to know whether individu-als will ultimately repay their loans, and in cheating detec-tion, schools want to know whether a student has cheated. These unobserved properties lie at the heart of decision mak-ers’ core ethical principles 1 that guide their decisions. Ethi-cal does not mean that these principles are justified morally but only that they are maxims the decision maker commits to. For instance, banks aim to grant loans only to individu-als who will be able to repay them, and schools aim to fail students who have cheated. Ideally, decision makers would make decisions strictly in accordance with these core ethical principles; we call such decisions normatively correct .

Definition 1. Let i be an individual with an unobserved bi-nary attribute y(i) ∈ { 0, 1}. We define the normatively cor-rect decision as d∗(i) := y(i).However, because these properties are unobserved, deci-sion makers must infer them from features , i.e., measured properties that are highly correlated with the unobserved property of interest. Examples include age, salary, or credit utilization in lending, or a student’s submitted answers in cheating detection. These features allow decision makers to predict the unobserved property with some probability, but such predictions are never perfect. For instance, although a young person with a high salary and low credit utilization is very likely to repay her loan, she may still default due to un-foreseen circumstances such as job loss or an accident. De-cisions based on such predictions therefore require decision makers to accept a certain inductive risk (Douglas 2000). For example, they may choose to reject loan applicants whose probability of repayment falls below a given threshold. Ac-cepting inductive risk entails accepting the possibility of normatively incorrect decisions: some applicants will be ap-proved despite ultimately defaulting, and some students will be accused of cheating despite having done nothing wrong. Setting the level of inductive risk is, ultimately, an ethical decision that decision makers must make (Douglas 2009). We call decisions that adhere to the chosen inductive risk 

epistemically correct .

Definition 2. Let τ ∈ [0 , 1] denote the inductive-risk thresh-old, and let p(x(i)) := P(Y = 1 | X = x(i)) be the prob-ability that individual i possesses the unobserved property 

Y = 1 given her features x(i). We define the epistemically correct decision given features X as 

d(x(i)) := 

1 if p(x(i)) > τ, 

0 else. 

> 1To support readers with more technical backgrounds, Sec-tion A offers a short glossary explaining the philosophical concepts used throughout the paper.

Decision makers do not have access to the true proba-bilities of loan default or cheating conditional on feature values. Instead, they must estimate these probabilities from data, typically using machine learning methods. The ma-chine learning model selection process involves a variety of choices—concerning model classes, regularization tech-niques, hyperparameters, and more (this pipeline is dis-cussed in more detail in Section 5.1)—with the goal of train-ing a model on a dataset that achieves high predictive per-formance. Moreover, decision makers usually do not have access to individuals’ true feature values. In lending, for example, individuals may provide incorrect information, or lenders may store inaccurate data. 

Definition 3. Let ˆp denote the model resulting from this model selection process, and let ˜x(i) denote the feature val-ues available to the decision maker. We define the actual decision as 

ˆd(˜ x(i)) := 

1 if ˆp(˜ x(i)) > τ, 

0 else. Algorithmic decisions thus result from two components: decision makers have ethical norms that determine which decisions are (normatively or epistemically) correct accord-ing to their core ethical principles and chosen inductive risk, and these ethical norms yield actual decisions only through their combination with epistemic beliefs. In the context of machine learning, these epistemic beliefs depend on mea-sured feature values and on the prediction model induced by a learning algorithm. That a decision is normatively or epistemically correct in our terminology does not mean that it is uncontrover-sial, only that it aligns with the decision maker’s ethical norms. One may, for instance, contest a school’s core eth-ical principle and argue that using generative AI in exams should not be penalized (Anders 2023). Likewise, decisions that are epistemically correct can still be challenged on eth-ical grounds, for example, by arguing that a threshold-based policy in cheating detection involves an unacceptably high inductive risk of false accusations. In this work, however, we focus not on challenging ethical norms but on challeng-ing the epistemic beliefs underlying algorithmic decisions. Which decisions should be contestable on such grounds? 

Definition 4. Assume a decision ˆd(˜ x(i)) is made about an individual i. We call the decision • normatively contestable if the decision is normatively in-correct, i.e., ˆd(˜ x(i))̸ = d∗(i), and • epistemically contestable relative to a feature set X if the decision is epistemically incorrect, i.e., ˆd(˜ x(i))̸ =

d(x(i)).Normative contestability binds decision makers to their own ethical principles. For example, if a student is accused of cheating but did not in fact cheat, she should be able to contest and overturn the decision as a matter of moral principle. Epistemic contestability, by contrast, binds deci-sion makers to the inductive risk they have accepted. For instance, if a decision maker assigns a high default risk to an individual who is in fact low risk, the individual should Level Meaning Evidence 

# 9 Normative contestability The decision ˆd(x(i)) misjudges the actual label y(i).Overruling evidence (Section 5.3) 

# Û Epistemic contestability The decision ˆd(x(i)) misjudges what the features warrant d(x(i)).Incorrect feature values (Section 5.2), Predictive multiplicity (Section 5.1) 

# > Somewhere contestability Some nearby x is epistemically con-testable. Reason intuitions + Anchors (Section 4.3), Con-tinuity intuitions + Counterfactuals (Section 4.1) 

Somewhere inaccuracy The probability estimate ˆp is off somewhere nearby. Monotonicity intuitions + LIME (Section 4.2) stronger contesting grounds Table 1: Levels of contestability. The table summarizes our main contributions in this paper: 1) We introduce four levels of algorithmic contestability, namely normative, epistemic, somewhere contestability, and local inaccuracies; 2) We show that XAI explanations, even when combined with human intuitions, only allow one to reach the lowest two levels; 3) We show that other types of evidence, such as predictive multiplicity, support higher levels of contestability. The arrow on the side indicates that establishing higher levels of contestability provides stronger normative grounds for overturning a decision. be able to challenge and reverse the decision on epistemic grounds. Anchoring contestability in decision makers’ own prin-ciples has a key advantage: most disputes over algorithmic decisions are unlikely to reach the courts and are instead re-solved through negotiation between the individual and the decision maker. If decision makers remain committed to their ethical and epistemic principles, then decisions that are normatively or epistemically contestable should, provided individuals can present sufficient supporting evidence, be overturned. 

# 4 XAI explanations can only establish that errors occur somewhere 

Model-agnostic XAI techniques provide insight into a ma-chine learning model by analyzing its sensitivity to changes in the input (Scholbeck et al. 2019). Prominent examples in-clude counterfactual explanations, LIME, or Anchors. Why do scholars regard XAI as a key enabler of algorith-mic contestability? This belief is rooted in an idea that has been articulated by Selbst and Barocas (2018) and is illus-trated in Figure 1: suppose an explanation method, such as LIME, indicates that the requested loan amount has a locally positive effect on the model’s prediction, implying that re-questing a higher loan increases the likelihood of approval. An individual may find this relationship highly counterintu-itive, expecting instead that requesting a larger loan would reduce her chances of obtaining it. In this way, the combina-tion of human intuitions and model explanations can reveal potential model errors and thereby seem to provide grounds for contestation. In the following, we show that while this line of reasoning is not misguided, the grounds for contesta-tion it yields are generally weak. But before we do so, we must clarify what we mean by human intuitions . Rather than estimating conditional probabilities over unobserved variables, as machine learn-ing models do, humans typically rely on rules of thumb 

when forming beliefs and making decisions (Gigerenzer and Gaissmaier 2011; Selbst and Barocas 2018). These rules are not arbitrary; they often exhibit high validity, having emerged through repeated experience and pattern recogni-tion (Gigerenzer 2023). Both experts and non-experts draw on a rich repertoire of such intuitive rules, including the fol-lowing: if a person highly similar to me obtains the loan, then so should I ( continuity rule ); a person with a higher income than me should, all else equal, have a higher proba-bility of obtaining the loan ( monotonicity rule ); and certain properties of mine constitute sufficient or insufficient rea-sons for granting or denying the loan ( reasons rule ). We call a human intuition correct if the rule it expresses applies in the given context. Suppose that an XAI explanation conflicts with human in-tuitions, as in the example above. To better understand what can be inferred from such a conflict, we introduce two no-tions of error. Somewhere contestability refers to the exis-tence of epistemically incorrect decisions within a neigh-borhood of the individual, whereas somewhere inaccuracy 

refers to the existence of incorrect model predictions in such a neighborhood. More formally: 

Definition 5. Let i be an individual and Bϵ(˜ x(i)) := {z ∈X | ∥ z − ˜x(i)∥ < ϵ } be an ϵ-ball around its feature values for a given ϵ > 0. We call a decision somewhere contestable 

if there exists a x ∈ B ϵ(˜ x(i)) such that ˆd(x)̸ = d(x). We call a machine learning model ˆp somewhere inaccurate if there exists an x ∈ B ϵ(˜ x(i)) such that ˆp(x)̸ = p(x).Unlike epistemic and normative contestability, some-where contestability and somewhere inaccuracies are insuf-ficient to overturn a decision. The presence of an epistem-ically incorrect prediction somewhere in the neighborhood of an individual remains fully compatible with the decision for that individual being correct. Logically, this yields a hi-erarchy: epistemic contestability is stronger than somewhere contestability, which in turn is stronger than somewhere in-accuracy. 2 Table 1 provides an overview of all the different levels of contestability. Although errors somewhere in the 

> 2We provide a short proof for this claim in the Appendix 7.

# ⚡

# ⚡

# ⚡           

> Human Intuitions
> Continuity rule: Small changes to my credit amount should not affect the decision.
> Monotonicity rule: Increasing my credit amount should not increase my chance of approval.
> Reason rule: Applications with a duration >31 months and lots of money in the
> savings account should be accepted.
> XAI Explanation
> Counterfactual: If the requested credit amount had been €38 larger, I would have been accepted.
> LIME: In the local region around me, credit amount has a positive influence (0.0671) on the decision.
> Anchor: Applications with (1) a duration >31 months and (2) no money in the
> checking account are being rejected.
> If the rule applies, there is a decision or prediction error
> somewhere in the local region around me.
> However, it remains unclear
> whether the decision about me was correct.

# ⇒

> Implication of the Conflict
> Decision

# ⇒

# ⇒

> I apply for a loan and get rejected by an ML model.

Figure 1: XAI explanations may conflict with human intuitions. For example, (1) a counterfactual explanation may conflict with continuity rules, (2) a LIME explanation may conflict with monotonicity rules, and (3) anchors may contradict reason rules. Even under the strong assumption that these intuitions are correct, i.e. the rules apply, such conflicts imply an error only somewhere in the neighborhood of the explained observation and thus insufficient grounds to overturn the decision at hand. Details on the examples are reported in Appendix D. neighborhood are a necessary condition for epistemically in-correct decisions and may thus serve as a starting point for algorithmic contestation, they provide only a very weak sig-nal: most predictive models exhibit errors somewhere, leav-ing it largely indeterminate whether the specific decision at hand ought to be overturned. In the following, we show that a conflict between human intuitions and XAI explanations—even in the best-case sce-nario where those intuitions are correct—supports at most an inference to an error somewhere. When the intuitions are themselves incorrect, which happens regularly (Tversky and Kahneman 1974), XAI explanations do not support any in-ference about the correctness of the decision of interest. 

4.1 Detecting continuity conflicts with counterfactual explanations 

Continuity rules take the form: If two individuals have highly similar feature values, they should be judged similarly. Such rules are widely adopted, including in the context of fairness (Kusner et al. 2017), as humans generally expect decisions to be made consistently (Kolodner 2014; Selbst and Barocas 2018). 

Definition 6 (Continuity rule) . If person i and j are very similar in their measured features ˜x(i), they should receive the same decision, i.e. d(˜ x(i)) = d(˜ x(j)).However, discontinuities can be justified. Consider two highly similar loan applicants, where one is 17 and the other is 18 years old. Granting the loan to the latter but not the former is justified, as they differ in legal capability, which is relevant in lending contexts. To check whether algorithmic decision-making conflicts with continuity rules, individuals need access to the feature values of similar alternative individuals who receive a differ-ent decision. We believe that counterfactual explanations are the best available approach to generate and select such al-ternative feature values. 3 A counterfactual identifies feature 

> 3

Closest real instances receiving a different classification would 

values that are maximally similar to those of the individual but would have resulted in a different decision. 

Definition 7 (Counterfactual explanation) . Let x ∈ X , then a counterfactual xc is an alternative point in X that lies (maximally) 4 close to x according to the distance function 

∥ · ∥ but receives a different decision, that is, ˆd(x) = 1 and 

ˆd(xc) = 0 or vice versa. The following theorem (proof in Section B) shows that counterfactuals can provide sufficient information for some-where contestability, however, as the Counterexample 1 shows, they do not render the decision in question epistemi-cally contestable. 

Theorem 1. If the continuity rule applies to the individual and her counterfactual, and their distance is smaller than ϵ

according to ∥ · ∥ , the decision is somewhere contestable. 

4.2 Detecting monotonicity conflicts with LIME 

Monotonicity rules take the form: If an individual differs from another individual only on a feature that has a pos-itive (or negative) relationship with the unobserved target, the former should not be judged worse or respectively bet-ter than the latter. Such rules are widely adopted, as humans expect decisions to be affected by feature changes in a con-sistent direction (Birnbaum 2019; Selbst and Barocas 2018). 

Definition 8 (Monotonicity rule) . If an individual i differs from an individual j only in feature k with ˜xik ≥ ˜xjk, then person i should receive at least as favorable a probability as 

also be a reasonable choice, but raise data privacy concerns (Pawel-czyk, Lakkaraju, and Neel 2023). 

> 4

While the original formulation of counterfactuals by Wachter, Mittelstadt, and Russell (2017) requires the counterfactual to be the closest input across the decision boundary, most methods gener-ate counterfactuals heuristically, e.g. using evolutionary algorithms (Dandl et al. 2020), and therefore produce close rather than closest counterfactuals. For purposes of contestability, maximal proximity is less essential than it is for recourse (Venkatasubramanian and Alfano 2020; Freiesleben 2022). j, i.e. p(˜ x(i)) ≥ p(˜ x(j)) (respectively unfavorable p(˜ x(i)) ≤

p(˜ x(j)) for negative monotonicity in k). Non-monotonic decision-making can be justified, as many relationships between features and unobserved vari-ables are themselves non-monotonic. For example, increas-ing income will usually improve creditworthiness, but ex-ceptionally high incomes may correlate with volatile self-employment or irregular cash flow, which can legitimately lower repayment probability. To check whether algorithmic decision-making conflicts with monotonicity rules, individuals need access to local feature-attribution information that identifies which features the model used and in which direction they influenced the prediction locally. One possible type of explanation to ap-proximate such local influence directions is LIME. A LIME explanation estimates the linear contribution of each feature to the model’s decision in the neighborhood of the individ-ual. 

Definition 9 (LIME Explanation) . Let x ∈ X , then LIME collects the function values of the model ˆp on points sam-pled from a local distribution πx around x. A linear regres-sion is then performed on the collected samples and function values, resulting in a linear model g(x) = pP

> i=1

wi ·xi approx-imating ˆp in the local environment πx. The local faithfulness of g to ˆp on πx is given by LF (g, ˆp) := Eπx [( g(πx) − ˆp(πx)) 2].

The following theorem (proof in Section B) shows that LIME explanations, given LIME coefficients wk point in the opposite direction of monotonicity rules, only provide suffi-cient information to establish somewhere inaccuracy. How-ever, as the counterexample 2 shows, LIME explanations are insufficient to render decisions (somewhere) epistemically contestable. 

Theorem 2. Let π be the local environment 5 around ˜x(i),with π = ( π1, . . . , π r ) jointly independent random vari-ables, and let π be constrained by Pπ (|π − ˜x(i)| > ϵ ) = 0 .Assume that the monotonicity intuition applies positively (respectively negatively) to feature k and that the LIME ex-plainer yields wk < 0 (respectively wk > 0). If the local faithfulness of g satisfies LF (g, ˆp) < Vπk [wkπk], then the model is somewhere inaccurate. 

Other, more direct, explanation methods for detecting monotonicity conflicts include individual conditional expec-tation curves (Goldstein et al. 2015) or prediction gradients (Wang et al. 2024), both of which also allow for the detec-tion of somewhere inaccuracies. We chose LIME here to il-lustrate monotonicity conflicts because it is most commonly used in contestability-relevant domains such as lending or hiring.     

> 5For notational simplicity, we abbreviate the local environment here as πrather than π˜x(i).

4.3 Detecting reason conflicts with Anchors 

Reason 6 rules take the form: If a person has certain feature values on a subset of relevant features, this provides suffi-cient grounds for making the decision. Humans often justify their decisions by providing reasons , aspects of the specific case that motivated the decision (Raz 1975). These reasons can then be challenged by questioning their validity or by highlighting other reasons that override them. 

Definition 10 (Reason rule) . If an individual i has fea-ture values satisfying conditions A, then this provides suf-ficient grounds to make the decision d(˜ x(i)) = 1 rather than 

d(˜ x(i)) = 0 , or vice versa. Some reason rules adopted by humans are in fact incor-rect. For example, while many people assume that a very high salary suffices to justify a positive credit decision, sub-stantial debt or an unstable job history may outweigh a high salary, thereby justifying a negative decision. To assess whether algorithmic decision-making conflicts with reason rules, individuals need access to local decision rules that identify which minimal sets of feature values the model treats as sufficient grounds for its prediction. We be-lieve that Anchors are the best available approach to approx-imate such locally sufficient conditions. An anchor identifies a set of feature constraints that, when satisfied, render the model’s prediction locally invariant with high probability in the surrounding neighborhood. 

Definition 11 (Anchor Explanation) . Let x ∈ X , an anchor 

is a rule B (a set of feature conditions) such that, for points sampled from a local distribution πx that satisfy B, the de-cision remains stable with high precision . The precision of an anchor B is defined as prec (B) := Eπx|B [1 ˆd(x)= ˆd(πx)] = 1 − δ for some δ ∈ [0 , 1] .The following theorem (proof in Section B) shows that Anchor explanations, given the Anchor indicates the op-posite decision as the reason rule and both have suffi-cient overlap, can provide sufficient information to estab-lish somewhere contestability. However, as the counterex-ample 3 shows, they do not render decisions epistemically contestable. 

Theorem 3. Let i be an individual to whom the reason rule 

A applies implying a positive (respectively negative) deci-sion and the anchor B applies, leading to a negative (respec-tively positive) decision with precision prec (B) = 1 − δ and 

> 6This reflects a specific conception of reasons that ties them to sufficiency for particular decisions. An alternative view treats reasons as factors that push a decision in a given direction (Snede-gar 2018). On this account, good reasons are factors that, when present, increase the probability of the unobserved variable of in-terest toward the realized decision. However, this view faces a key difficulty: what counts as a good reason is often highly context-dependent and sensitive to specific counterfactual feature values, making it hard to formulate as a general rule. Moreover, even if suitable local rules could be specified, the most promising auditing method, counterfactual Shapley values (Albini et al. 2022), would still be inadequate, as it relies heavily on model predictions for data points far from the instance being explained and thus cannot even reliably detect somewhere inaccuracies.

Pπx (B) > 0, and let π be constrained by Pπ (|π − ˜x(i)| >ϵ) = 0 . If Pπx (A ∩ B) > δ , then the decision is somewhere contestable. 

# 5 Evidence that allows for normative and strong epistemic contestability 

We have shown that conflicts between human intuitions and standard XAI explanations reveal errors somewhere; how-ever, as argued, such errors are insufficient to justify over-turning a decision. What kind of evidence, then, would en-able individuals to assess and demonstrate that a decision is normatively or epistemically contestable? In the following, we examine three types of evidence that can be sufficient to warrant reversal: predictive multiplicity, incorrect feature values, and ignored overruling evidence. 

5.1 Predictive multiplicity reflects the chances for epistemic contestability 

Machine learning is, at its core, a tool of inductive infer-ence. Given a dataset, e.g., containing creditworthy and non-creditworthy applicants, the goal is to learn a model that is able to distinguish loan applicants who will repay their loan from those who will not. Like any other tool of inductive in-ference, machine learning requires inductive assumptions to generalize to novel instances. Modelers incorporate these inductive assumptions into the modeling pipeline through design choices that reflect their domain knowledge, always with the goal of best estimating the true underlying relationship p. Model classes, regular-ization techniques, and hyperparameters are selected based on this knowledge. In addition to such intentional choices ,model selection is also influenced by conventional choices ,such as the selection of a learning rate, or arbitrary choices ,such as the selection of random seeds (Ganesh, Taik, and Farnadi 2025; Cavus, Wo´ znica, and Biecek 2025). Even though inductive assumptions play a central role in guiding the model selection process, the iron rule in machine learn-ing is that only models with strong performance on a holdout set are ultimately selected (Hardt 2025). As with all tools of inductive inference, this gives rise to a problem of contrastive underdetermination (Laudan 1990; Stanford 2023): multiple jointly incompatible models align equally well with both the observed data and the relevant do-main knowledge, making it difficult to choose among them. In machine learning, this phenomenon has been called model multiplicity or the Rashomon effect (Breiman 2001; Black, Raghavan, and Barocas 2022). There always exists a multi-tude of prediction models that cannot be distinguished from an epistemic perspective: they result from the same model selection process and exhibit (almost) identical predictive performance. 7 The set of such models has been called the 

Rashomon set .

> 7Indeed, non-epistemic values (Longino 2025), such as fairness or interpretability concerns, can guide model selection in such sit-uations, an idea now widely discussed in the model multiplicity literature (Black, Raghavan, and Barocas 2022; Xin et al. 2022; Rudin et al. 2024; Meyer et al. 2025; H¨ oltgen and Oliver 2025).

Definition 12 (Rashomon model and set) . Let S denote the model selection process, and let HD,δ denote a random variable describing the intentional, conventional, and arbi-trary inductive choices, which are informed by the dataset D

and the performance satisfaction level δ. For a given model 

ˆp := S(HD,δ , D ), we call • ˆq a Rashomon model relative to ˆp if both result from the same model selection process applied to the same dataset and performance satisfaction level but differ in their in-ductive choices HD,δ ; formally, ˆq = S(H′ 

> D,δ

, D ) for some H′

> D,δ

̸ = HD,δ with positive density; and • RS ˆp := {ˆq1, . . . , ˆqn} a Rashomon set if it consists of 

n randomly drawn Rashomon models, formally induced by i.i.d. sampled inductive choices H(i) 

> D,δ

∼ HD,δ with 

ˆqi = S(H(i) 

> D,δ

, D ).Since all Rashomon models surpass the performance sat-isfaction level, they exhibit similar performance. Indeed, similar performance is often used as a defining criterion for Rashomon models (Fisher, Rudin, and Dominici 2019; Watson-Daniels, Parkes, and Ustun 2023; Ganesh, Taik, and Farnadi 2025). We argue, however, that arising from the same model-selection process provides a more appropriate definition, as it ensures not only comparable compatibility with the data across Rashomon models, but also consistency with researchers’ background knowledge as encoded in the inductive choices. From a purely epistemic perspective, all Rashomon mod-els must be regarded as on a par: they have equal claim to representing the ground truth dependence p. Despite this, they can differ substantially in their predictions for individ-ual instances, a phenomenon known as predictive multiplic-ity (Marx, Calmon, and Ustun 2020). 8 Since these models have equal epistemic justification, so do their predictions. If some predictions are positive while others are negative, this provides a meaningful basis for contesting the decision, as argued by Black, Raghavan, and Barocas (2022) and formal-ized in the following theorem. The theorem shows that, unless the decision maker has good reason to regard the selected model as superior, pre-dictive multiplicity yields a lower bound on the probability that a decision is epistemically contestable. In this way, pre-dictive multiplicity offers a principled route to establishing epistemic contestability. 

Theorem 4. Let ˆp := S(HD,δ , D ) denote the prediction model used in decision ˆd, obtained from a random draw from 

HD,δ , and let RS ˆp denote a Rashomon set. Assume there is no measurement error in the feature values, i.e. ˜x(i) = x(i).Then the probability that ˆp is epistemically incorrect for an individual i can be lower bounded by    

> PHD,δ (d(x(i))̸= ˆd(x(i))) ≥min {PHD,δ ( ˆd(x(i))=1) ,PHD,δ ( ˆd(x(i))=0) }.

We denote this lower bound by θ, which can be estimated via the minimum of the proportions of positive and negative 

> 8A variety of global measures for predictive multiplicity have been proposed (Watson-Daniels, Parkes, and Ustun 2023).

decisions in the Rashomon set, i.e.   

> ˆθRS ˆp:= min

n 1       

> |RS ˆp|
> P
> m∈RS ˆp
> 1ˆdm (x(i))=1 ,1
> |RS ˆp|
> P
> m∈RS ˆp
> 1ˆdm (x(i))=0

o

> .

The estimator is asymptotically consistent, although it sys-tematically underestimates θ in finite samples. 9

Predictive multiplicity, and thus the prospects for success-ful epistemic contestability, is high in two scenarios: (1) when all predictions are close to τ but some lie above and others below, corresponding to high aleatoric uncertainty; and (2) when predictions are widely spread, with some far above and others far below τ , corresponding to high epis-temic uncertainty (H¨ ullermeier and Waegeman 2021). 

Policy implication. Individuals should be informed of the predictive multiplicity underlying their decision by reporting predictive multiplicity in their case. The re-spective Rashomon set should be randomly sampled from the space of plausible, high-performing models and constructed independently of the individual’s fea-ture values. 

5.2 Wrong feature values can enable epistemic contestability 

Algorithmic decision-making crucially relies on the mea-sured feature values of individuals ˜x(i). In the context of lending, some of these features are provided to the credit institution by the applicant herself, such as age, marital sta-tus, or the requested credit amount. Others stem from in-formation the bank has access to in its databases, such as the individual’s credit or transaction history. Finally, there is information that the bank actively gathers to assess the ap-plicant’s trustworthiness, e.g., public records and court judg-ments (Dansana et al. 2024). During the processes of entering, transferring, or collect-ing data, errors can occur: the applicant’s employment status may have changed; the credit history may contain redundant entries; or the collected public records may pertain to a dif-ferent individual with the same name. 10 Such errors are often not visible to the individual, as she typically only knows the features she has entered herself, and even those may contain unnoticed mistakes. To make reliable decisions, a solid epistemic basis is in-dispensable. A decision can only be supported through evi-dence if that evidence is correct (Conee and Feldman 2004). Algorithmic decision-making thus inherits a standard famil-iar from theories of epistemic justification: if the informa-tional premises on which an inference is based are defective, then the resulting belief or decision is epistemically unwar-ranted, even if the inferential tool itself is flawless (Wright 2003). 

> 9The finite-sample downward bias can be bounded; see Clark (1961).
> 10 Similarly, feature values can be subject to uncertainty. For ex-ample, estimated monthly expenses or salary may vary substan-tially for self-employed or commission-based individuals.

If the measured feature values ˜x(i) differ substantially from the true values x(i), this discrepancy can lead to corre-sponding errors in predictions and decisions (Tal 2020). To assess whether this is the case, individuals should be granted 

what-if access to the model; that is, they should be allowed to test the model on a limited set of relevant input values. 

Definition 13 (What-if) . What-if provides individuals ac-cess to {ˆp(x) | x ∈ X rel } for a limited set of relevant inputs 

Xrel specified by the individual subject to the decision. The following theorem shows that incorrect feature val-ues, when corrected values would reverse the decision, en-able individuals to epistemically contest the decision. While the premise of epistemic correctness may appear strong, denying it would require decision makers to question the va-lidity of the very model they rely on. 

Theorem 5. Assume the decision model ˆd is epistemically correct, i.e. ˆd = d. If individuals can prove that their true feature values are x(i) rather than ˜x(i), and if ˆd(x(i))̸ =ˆd(˜ x(i)), then the decision is epistemically contestable. 

Policy implication. Individuals should be informed about their personal information used in the decision-making process. Additionally, they should be able to query the model using alternative inputs. 

5.3 Overruling evidence is a means towards normative contestability 

Algorithmic decision-making reduces the epistemic basis of decisions to a fixed set of features to infer the unob-served property of interest, e.g., whether the loan will be repaid. While these features are carefully chosen, norma-tively incorrect decisions may still be made, even if the re-sulting decision closely approximates the epistemically cor-rect one—even for optimal classifiers (Hastie et al. 2009). Such a setting is highly static. By contrast, when humans make decisions, they flexibly incorporate additional infor-mation about other relevant feature values when these are presented to them. For example, if an individual is accused of cheating by her professor, she can provide further infor-mation to support her case, such as contemporaneous drafts, handwritten notes, or a version history demonstrating that the text was produced independently; this information is then taken into account in the professor’s decision. In such cases, a decision may remain epistemically correct relative to the feature set X, but it is no longer epistemically correct once the additional features are considered. We can transfer the idea underlying such overruling evidence to the algorith-mic case. 

Definition 14 (Overruling evidence) . We call features 

E overruling evidence for individual i if dX (x(i))̸ =

dX,E (x(i), e (i)), where dX := 1P(Y =1 |X)>τ and dX,E := 

1P(Y =1 |X,E )>τ .Contesting a decision through overruling evidence dif-fers fundamentally from other forms of contestation. Con-testation based on XAI explanations, predictive multiplic-ity, or incorrect feature values all target the correctness of estimations or measurements within a fixed feature set X

and aim to establish epistemic contestability relative to X.Overruling evidence, by contrast, accepts that the decision is epistemically correct relative to X but epistemically incor-rect, and thus contestable, relative to the expanded feature set X, E . This invokes an epistemic meta-principle, namely the Principle of Total Evidence (Carnap 1947), according to which beliefs should always be based on all available ev-idence. This principle has strong normative support: it has been shown that new evidence can only increase, and never decrease, expected utility when the cost of information is negligible (Taroni et al. 2024; Schurz 2024). An analogous result is shown below for our setting, demonstrating that fewer or equal normatively incorrect de-cisions are made when additional evidence is taken into ac-count. This implies that decisions based on a smaller evi-dential basis are generally less justified than decisions based on all available evidence, thereby supporting the idea that overruling evidence should overturn a decision. 

Theorem 6. Assume that X and E describe two sets of fea-tures. Moreover, assume that the prediction models used are Bayes-optimal relative to X and to X, E , respectively, i.e. 

ˆpX = pX = P(Y | X) and ˆpX,E = pX,E = P(Y | X, E ).Consequently, ˆdX = dX and ˆdX,E = dX,E . Then, the ex-pected number of normatively contestable decisions relative to X is greater than the expected number of normatively contestable decisions relative to X, E , i.e. 

EY,X,E [d∗̸ = ˆdX,E ] ≤ EY,X [d∗̸ = ˆdX ].

Contesting a decision by means of overruling evidence is often the closest we can get to normative contestability, since the property of interest Y is typically unobservable. For ex-ample, it is not possible at decision time to observe whether the loan will ultimately be repaid. However, even when over-ruling evidence sometimes exists, this is not necessarily al-ways the case; consider a loan applicant for whom all ob-servable evidence speaks against repayment, but who would later win the lottery and repay the loan. Rendering such a normatively incorrect decision epistemically contestable would require Laplace’s demon (Frigg et al. 2014). Overruling evidence is appealing in theory but difficult to implement in practice. Decision makers typically do not have access to an approximation of dX,E for arbitrary evi-dence E. This leads to a reversal of roles (Brennan-Marquez and Henderson 2019): individuals must explain why evi-dence E changes their repayment probability sufficiently to warrant their desired decision. In practice, this often results in a negotiation process between the decision maker and the individual, in which both parties attempt to reach an agree-ment (Lipsky 2010). Particularly when the deployed deci-sion model exhibits low predictive performance 11 or when uncertainty for a given individual is high, decision makers should have a strong incentive to take overruling evidence into account. 

> 11 Low predictive performance can indicate that relevant features are missing, which, if available, would allow for better predictions.

Policy implication. Individuals should be allowed to submit additional evidence concerning features that were not considered in the original decision-making process. This is particularly critical when the deployed predictive model has low predictive performance or when the decision involves high uncertainty. 

# 6 Individuals may arguably have rights to this evidence according to the GDPR 

So far, we have taken a purely normative perspective , fo-cusing on the question of which decisions should be over-turned from an epistemic standpoint. We argued that, to en-able individuals to contest decisions, they should gain access to certain types of evidence, namely: information about pre-dictive multiplicity, their feature values used, API access to query the model with a limited number of alternative inputs, and the ability to provide additional feature information. We now shift from this normative approach to a legal perspec-tive . Focusing on European legislation, we ask: Do citizens have legal rights to such evidence in the context of algorith-mic contestability? Contestability forms the “backbone” of Article 22 GDPR (Bayamlıo˘ glu 2022). Specifically, the right to contest a de-cision is formally defined in Article 22(3) GDPR. This right applies only when a decision concerning the data subject is based solely on automated processing, as specified in Arti-cle 22(1) GDPR, which is generally prohibited unless the safeguards outlined in Article 22(2) GDPR are met. A re-cent ECJ judgment (C-634/21 SCHUFA Holding (Scoring), 7 December 2023, ECLI:EU:C:2023:957) ruled that, in the context of credit scoring, the concept of a ’decision’ within the meaning of Article 22 GDPR is to be understood broadly. Interestingly, despite the centrality of the right to contest within Article 22, it remains “barely articulated” in the reg-ulation (Kaminski and Urban 2021). 12 

So far, Art. 22 GDPR together with the corresponding Recital 71 GDPR has primarily been interpreted by XAI researchers as promoting a right to explanations (Wachter, Mittelstadt, and Russell 2017), which in turn should em-power data subjects to contest decisions (Selbst and Powles 2018) (see also C-203/22 Dun & Bradstreet, 27 February 2025, ECLI:EU:C:2025:117). However, Article 22 GDPR can be interpreted more broadly. First, it specifies also that individuals have the right to express their point of view, aligning with our recommendation that individuals should be able to provide additional feature information to sup-port their case. Second, the right to an explanation is not limited to current XAI solutions but encompasses any type of evidence that allows individuals to better understand the decision-making process (Vredenburgh 2022). This may in-clude what-if access through an API for alternative input val-ues. Similarly, this should arguably include the uncertainty 

> 12 While the right to contest a decision is strictly defined in Ar-ticle 22(3) GDPR, Article 22(1) GDPR can, in a broader sense, also be interpreted as providing a right to object to being subject to automated decision-making, thereby extending the concept beyond strict contestation.

in the decision for their particular case, which can be ex-pressed through predictive multiplicity. This interpretation aligns with the decision maker’s obligation to use appropri-ate statistical procedures to minimize errors, as specified in Recital 71 GDPR: “In order to ensure fair and transparent processing in respect of the data subject, [...] the controller should [...] implement technical and organisational measures appropriate to ensure, in particular, that factors which result in inaccuracies in personal data are corrected and the risk of errors is minimised [...]”. This paragraph also emphasizes the decision maker’s obli-gation to implement technical and organizational measures to correct inaccuracies in personal data. Providing individ-uals access to their specific data is arguably the most direct way to fulfill this obligation, as it allows them to intervene when inaccuracies occur. Given the importance of algorith-mic contestation, decision-makers bear the responsibility of ensuring that all input data to the algorithm are accurate. One might argue that in contexts like loan approvals, pro-viding the types of information we recommend could im-pose significant demands on decision makers. Access to pre-dictive multiplicity would require training multiple models with equal performance, all of which must meet stringent fairness and accountability standards. Providing individuals with their complete data and API access may expose propri-etary company information (Sokol and Flach 2019). More-over, responding to all additional feature information sub-mitted by individuals could be costly and burdensome. However, without access to these types of information, individuals lack the necessary means to exercise their right to contestation, rendering the possibility that the right ef-fectively becomes meaningless. In contexts where decision makers cannot provide sufficient support for contestation, it may be questionable whether the decision should be au-tomated at all. Importantly, XAI explanations alone, as we have shown, are insufficient to meet the demands of the right to contest and should not be considered an adequate effort by decision makers to comply with the GDPR. 

# 7 Discussion 

In this paper, we conceptualized algorithmic contestability as the natural counterpart to traditional algorithmic recourse. Instead of recommending actions that change a decision, contestability concerns the provision of evidence that allows individuals to overturn a decision. We showed that the evi-dence provided by common XAI methods, together with hu-man intuitions, allows only for the detection of errors some-where and is insufficient to warrant decision reversal. Conse-quently, we moved beyond XAI and examined other sources of evidence that are, from a normative perspective, sufficient to overturn algorithmic decisions. We focused on predictive multiplicity, wrong feature values, and overruling evidence. For each, we grounded our analysis in epistemological the-ory and demonstrated that these forms of evidence indeed allow decisions to be overturned. We concluded by arguing that current legislation in the European Union, in particular the GDPR, already grants individuals access to these kinds of evidence that enable them to overturn decisions. 

Ethical reasons for contesting. Our work focused on epistemic grounds for contestation; however, there can also be ethical reasons for contestation. For instance, because the data may reflect societal biases or discrimination, using epis-temically correct decisions as a standard becomes problem-atic, as these decisions are based on observational data in-fluenced by such biases (Green 2022; Barocas, Hardt, and Narayanan 2023). Similarly, a model may rely on protected attributes in its decision-making that are predictive of the target but nevertheless discriminate against certain groups. Excluding such attributes is often insufficient to address this issue due to the existence of proxy variables (Dwork et al. 2012). Since these ethical concerns are already widely dis-cussed in the fairness community, we deliberately focused on the thus-far overlooked epistemic aspects of contestabil-ity. In practice, decisions can of course be contested on both ethical and epistemic grounds. 

Contesting when individuals and decision makers are adversarial. For future work, we believe that incorporating a stakeholders’ perspective would be highly fruitful. In our setup, individuals can contest decisions by appealing to the ethical norms to which the decision maker commits. Thus, in our account, the goals of the involved parties are aligned: individuals who are likely to repay their loans aim to con-vince the decision maker that they will do so, while individ-uals who did not cheat aim to convince the decision maker that they acted honestly. Such situations are ideal, as con-testability then consistently leads to better decisions (Cohen et al. 2023). Many real-world settings, however, are adver-sarial, and the interests of individuals and decision makers are not aligned (Bordt et al. 2022). In such contexts, many open questions remain: Who provides the evidence for con-testability, and who mediates between the individual and the decision maker? 

The limits of XAI explanations for contestability. Our analysis was confined to a subset of human intuitions and XAI explanations. Clearly, there are further intuitive rules that humans adhere to; consider, for example, causal-relevance rules , according to which only features that are causally relevant to the unobserved property should affect the decision (Sloman and Lagnado 2015; Ye et al. 2024). Likewise, other XAI explanations, such as Shapley inter-action values (Muschalik et al. 2024), global feature effect or importance measures (Molnar 2020), or approaches from mechanistic interpretability (Sharkey et al. 2025), could be analyzed with respect to their value for contestability. We believe that even if the analysis were extended along these lines, our core claim would remain: XAI explanations alone are insufficient to enable individuals to overturn decisions and must therefore be complemented by other forms of evi-dence. 

# Acknowledgments 

We thank Tom Sterkenburg and the participants of the MCMP colloquium for valuable feedback on the manuscript. This research was supported by the German Research Foundation (DFG), project number 511917847; by the Clus-ter of Excellence “Machine Learning — New Perspectives for Science” (EXC 2064/1, project number 390727645); and by the Carl Zeiss Foundation through the CZS Center for AI and Law. 

# Generative AI Disclosure Statement 

All authors confirm that generative AI tools were used only for minor support in manuscript preparation. Specifically, we used ChatGPT (version 5) and Gemini (version 3) to assist with grammar and style editing, as well as with La-TeX drafting of boxes and tables. No text, claims, or refer-ences were generated by these tools. All authors take full re-sponsibility for the originality, accuracy, and integrity of the manuscript. For coding, Claude Code (Opus 4.6) was used. 

# References 

2020. South German Credit. UCI Machine Learning Repos-itory. DOI: https://doi.org/10.24432/C5QG88. Adadi, A.; and Berrada, M. 2018. Peeking inside the black-box: a survey on explainable artificial intelligence (XAI). 

IEEE access , 6: 52138–52160. Albini, E.; Long, J.; Dervovic, D.; and Magazzeni, D. 2022. Counterfactual shapley additive explanations. In Proceed-ings of the 2022 ACM conference on fairness, accountabil-ity, and transparency , 1054–1070. Aler Tubella, A.; Theodorou, A.; Dignum, V.; and Michael, L. 2020. Contestable black boxes. In International Joint Conference on Rules and Reasoning , 159–167. Springer. Alfrink, K.; Keller, I.; Kortuem, G.; and Doorn, N. 2023. Contestable AI by design: Towards a framework. Minds and Machines , 33(4): 613–639. Anders, B. A. 2023. Is using ChatGPT cheating, plagiarism, both, neither, or forward thinking? Patterns , 4(3). Barocas, S.; Hardt, M.; and Narayanan, A. 2023. Fairness and machine learning: Limitations and opportunities . MIT Press. Bayamlıo˘ glu, E. 2022. The right to contest automated deci-sions under the General Data Protection Regulation: Beyond the so-called “right to explanation”. Regulation & Gover-nance , 16(4): 1058–1078. Birnbaum, M. H. 2019. Violations of monotonicity in judg-ment and decision making. In Choice, decision, and mea-surement , 73–100. Routledge. Black, E.; Raghavan, M.; and Barocas, S. 2022. Model mul-tiplicity: Opportunities, concerns, and solutions. In Proceed-ings of the 2022 ACM conference on fairness, accountabil-ity, and transparency , 850–863. Bordt, S.; Finck, M.; Raidl, E.; and Von Luxburg, U. 2022. Post-hoc explanations fail to achieve their purpose in adver-sarial contexts. In Proceedings of the 2022 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency , 891–905. Breiman, L. 2001. Statistical modeling: The two cultures (with comments and a rejoinder by the author). Statistical science , 16(3): 199–231. Brennan-Marquez, K.; and Henderson, S. E. 2019. Artifi-cial intelligence and role-reversible judgment. J. Crim. L. & Criminology , 109: 137. Carnap, R. 1947. On the application of inductive logic. Phi-losophy and phenomenological research , 8(1): 133–148. Cavus, M.; Wo´ znica, K.; and Biecek, P. 2025. The Role of Hyperparameters in Predictive Multiplicity. arXiv:2503.13506. Clark, C. E. 1961. The greatest of a finite set of random variables. Operations Research , 9(2): 145–162. Cohen, I. G.; Babic, B.; Gerke, S.; Xia, Q.; Evgeniou, T.; and Wertenbroch, K. 2023. How AI can learn from the law: putting humans in the loop only on appeal. npj Dig-ital Medicine , 6(1): 160. Conee, E.; and Feldman, R. 2004. Evidentialism: Essays in epistemology . Clarendon Press. Dandl, S.; Molnar, C.; Binder, M.; and Bischl, B. 2020. Multi-objective counterfactual explanations. In Interna-tional conference on parallel problem solving from nature ,448–469. Springer. Dansana, D.; Patro, S. G. K.; Mishra, B. K.; Prasad, V.; Razak, A.; and Wodajo, A. W. 2024. Analyzing the impact of loan features on bank loan prediction using Random For-est algorithm. Engineering Reports , 6(2): e12707. Department of Industry, Innovation and Science. 2019. Ar-tificial Intelligence: Australia’s Ethics Framework. Douglas, H. 2000. Inductive risk and values in science. Phi-losophy of science , 67(4): 559–579. Douglas, H. E. 2009. Science, policy, and the value-free ideal . University of Pittsburgh Press. Dwork, C.; Hardt, M.; Pitassi, T.; Reingold, O.; and Zemel, R. 2012. Fairness through awareness. In Proceedings of the 3rd innovations in theoretical computer science conference ,214–226. Fisher, A.; Rudin, C.; and Dominici, F. 2019. All models are wrong, but many are useful: Learning a variable’s impor-tance by studying an entire class of prediction models simul-taneously. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 20(177): 1–81. Freiesleben, T. 2022. The intriguing relation between coun-terfactual explanations and adversarial examples. Minds and Machines , 32(1): 77–109. Frigg, R.; Bradley, S.; Du, H.; and Smith, L. A. 2014. Laplace’s demon and the adventures of his apprentices. Phi-losophy of Science , 81(1): 31–59. Ganesh, P.; Taik, A.; and Farnadi, G. 2025. Systemizing Multiplicity: The Curious Case of Arbitrariness in Machine Learning. In Proceedings of the AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society , volume 8, 1032–1048. Gigerenzer, G. 2023. The intelligence of intuition . Cam-bridge University Press. Gigerenzer, G.; and Gaissmaier, W. 2011. Heuristic decision making. Annual review of psychology , 62(2011): 451–482. Goldstein, A.; Kapelner, A.; Bleich, J.; and Pitkin, E. 2015. Peeking inside the black box: Visualizing statistical learning with plots of individual conditional expectation. Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics , 24(1): 44–65. Green, B. 2022. Escaping the impossibility of fairness: From formal to substantive algorithmic fairness. Philosophy & Technology , 35(4): 90. Hardt, M. 2025. The Emerging Science of Machine Learning Benchmarks. Online at https://mlbenchmarks.org. Manuscript. Hastie, T.; Tibshirani, R.; Friedman, J.; et al. 2009. The ele-ments of statistical learning . Springer. Henin, C.; and Le M´ etayer, D. 2021. A framework to contest and justify algorithmic decisions. AI and Ethics , 1(4): 463– 476. Hirsch, T.; Merced, K.; Narayanan, S.; Imel, Z. E.; and Atkins, D. C. 2017. Designing contestability: Interaction de-sign, machine learning, and mental health. In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Designing Interactive Systems ,95–99. H¨ oltgen, B.; and Oliver, N. 2025. Reconsidering Fairness Through Unawareness From the Perspective of Model Mul-tiplicity. In Proceedings of the 5th ACM Conference on Eq-uity and Access in Algorithms, Mechanisms, and Optimiza-tion , 241–255. H¨ ullermeier, E.; and Waegeman, W. 2021. Aleatoric and epistemic uncertainty in machine learning: An introduction to concepts and methods. Machine learning , 110(3): 457– 506. Kaminski, M. E.; and Urban, J. M. 2021. The right to contest AI. Columbia Law Review , 121(7): 1957–2048. Karimi, A.-H.; Barthe, G.; Sch¨ olkopf, B.; and Valera, I. 2022. A survey of algorithmic recourse: contrastive explana-tions and consequential recommendations. ACM Computing Surveys , 55(5): 1–29. Kolodner, J. 2014. Case-based reasoning . Morgan Kauf-mann. K¨ onig, G.; Fokkema, H.; Freiesleben, T.; Mendler-D¨ unner, C.; and von Luxburg, U. 2025. Performative validity of re-course explanations. Advances in Neural Information Pro-cessing Systems , 39. K¨ onig, G.; Freiesleben, T.; and Grosse-Wentrup, M. 2023. Improvement-focused causal recourse (ICR). In Proceed-ings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , vol-ume 37, 11847–11855. Kusner, M. J.; Loftus, J.; Russell, C.; and Silva, R. 2017. Counterfactual fairness. Advances in neural information processing systems , 30. Laudan, L. 1990. Demystifying underdetermination. Min-nesota studies in the philosophy of science , 14(1990): 267– 297. Lipsky, M. 2010. Street-level bureaucracy: Dilemmas of the individual in public service . Russell Sage Foundation. Lipton, Z. C. 2018. The mythos of model interpretability: In machine learning, the concept of interpretability is both important and slippery. Queue , 16(3): 31–57. Longino, H. 2025. The Social Dimensions of Scientific Knowledge. In Zalta, E. N.; and Nodelman, U., eds., 

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Re-search Lab, Stanford University, Spring 2025 edition. Lyons, H.; Velloso, E.; and Miller, T. 2021. Conceptual-ising contestability: Perspectives on contesting algorithmic decisions. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction , 5(CSCW1): 1–25. Mansi, G.; Karusala, N.; and Riedl, M. 2025. Legally-Informed Explainable AI. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.10708 .Marx, C.; Calmon, F.; and Ustun, B. 2020. Predictive multi-plicity in classification. In International conference on ma-chine learning , 6765–6774. PMLR. Maxwell, W.; and Dumas, B. 2023. Meaningful XAI based on user-centric design methodology: Combining legal and human-computer interaction (HCI) approaches to achieve meaningful algorithmic explainability. Available at SSRN 4520754 .Meyer, A. P.; Kim, Y.-S.; D’Antoni, L.; and Albarghouthi, A. 2025. Perceptions of the Fairness Impacts of Multiplicity in Machine Learning. In Proceedings of the 2025 CHI Con-ference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 1–15. Molnar, C. 2020. Interpretable machine learning . Lulu.com. Moreira, C.; Palatkina, A.; Braca, D.; Walsh, D. M.; Leihn, P. J.; Chen, F.; and Hubig, N. C. 2025. Explainable AI Sys-tems Must Be Contestable: Here’s How to Make It Happen. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.01662 .Mulligan, D. K.; Kluttz, D.; and Kohli, N. 2019. Shaping our tools: Contestability as a means to promote responsible algorithmic decision making in the professions. Available at SSRN 3311894 .Muschalik, M.; Baniecki, H.; Fumagalli, F.; Kolpaczki, P.; Hammer, B.; and H¨ ullermeier, E. 2024. shapiq: Shapley in-teractions for machine learning. Advances in Neural Infor-mation Processing Systems , 37: 130324–130357. Pawelczyk, M.; Lakkaraju, H.; and Neel, S. 2023. On the privacy risks of algorithmic recourse. In International Con-ference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics , 9680–9696. PMLR. Pedregosa, F.; Varoquaux, G.; Gramfort, A.; Michel, V.; Thirion, B.; Grisel, O.; Blondel, M.; Prettenhofer, P.; Weiss, R.; Dubourg, V.; Vanderplas, J.; Passos, A.; Cournapeau, D.; Brucher, M.; Perrot, M.; and Duchesnay, E. 2011. Scikit-learn: Machine Learning in Python. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 12: 2825–2830. Raz, J. 1975. Reasons for action, decisions and norms. 

Mind , 84(336): 481–499. Ribeiro, M. T.; Singh, S.; and Guestrin, C. 2016. ” Why should I trust you?” Explaining the predictions of any clas-sifier. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD interna-tional conference on knowledge discovery and data mining ,1135–1144. Ribeiro, M. T.; Singh, S.; and Guestrin, C. 2018. Anchors: High-precision model-agnostic explanations. In Proceed-ings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence , vol-ume 32. Rudin, C.; Zhong, C.; Semenova, L.; Seltzer, M.; Parr, R.; Liu, J.; Katta, S.; Donnelly, J.; Chen, H.; and Boner, Z. 2024. Position: amazing things come from having many good models. In Proceedings of the 41st International Con-ference on Machine Learning , 42783–42795. Sarra, C. 2020. Put dialectics into the machine: protection against automatic-decision-making through a deeper under-standing of contestability by design. Global Jurist , 20(3): 20200003. Schmude, T.; Yurrita, M.; Alfrink, K.; Goff, T. L.; and Viard, T. 2025. ” Two Means to an End Goal”: Connecting Explain-ability and Contestability in the Regulation of Public Sector AI. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.18236 .Scholbeck, C. A.; Molnar, C.; Heumann, C.; Bischl, B.; and Casalicchio, G. 2019. Sampling, intervention, prediction, aggregation: a generalized framework for model-agnostic interpretations. In Joint European conference on machine learning and knowledge discovery in databases , 205–216. Springer. Schurz, G. 2024. The Principle of Total Evidence: Justi-fication and Political Significance. Acta Analytica , 39(4): 677–692. Selbst, A.; and Powles, J. 2018. “Meaningful information” and the right to explanation. In conference on fairness, ac-countability and transparency , 48–48. PMLR. Selbst, A. D.; and Barocas, S. 2018. The intuitive appeal of explainable machines. Fordham L. Rev. , 87: 1085. Sharkey, L.; Chughtai, B.; Batson, J.; Lindsey, J.; Wu, J.; Bushnaq, L.; Goldowsky-Dill, N.; Heimersheim, S.; Ortega, A.; Bloom, J.; et al. 2025. Open problems in mechanistic interpretability. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.16496 .Sloman, S. A.; and Lagnado, D. 2015. Causality in thought. 

Annual review of psychology , 66(1): 223–247. Snedegar, J. 2018. Reasons for and reasons against. Philo-sophical Studies , 175(3): 725–743. Sokol, K.; and Flach, P. 2019. Counterfactual explanations of machine learning predictions: opportunities and chal-lenges for AI safety. In 2019 AAAI Workshop on Artificial Intelligence Safety, SafeAI 2019 . CEUR Workshop Proceed-ings. Stanford, K. 2023. Underdetermination of Scientific Theory. In Zalta, E. N.; and Nodelman, U., eds., The Stanford Ency-clopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stan-ford University, Summer 2023 edition. Tal, E. 2020. Measurement in Science. In Zalta, E. N., ed., 

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Re-search Lab, Stanford University, Fall 2020 edition. Taroni, F.; Aitken, C.; Bozza, S.; and Juchli, P. 2024. The principle of total evidence reprised. Law, Probability and Risk , 23(1): mgae011. Tversky, A.; and Kahneman, D. 1974. Judgment under Un-certainty: Heuristics and Biases: Biases in judgments re-veal some heuristics of thinking under uncertainty. science ,185(4157): 1124–1131. Upadhyay, S.; Joshi, S.; and Lakkaraju, H. 2021. Towards robust and reliable algorithmic recourse. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 34: 16926–16937. Ustun, B.; Spangher, A.; and Liu, Y. 2019. Actionable re-course in linear classification. In Proceedings of the confer-ence on fairness, accountability, and transparency , 10–19. Vaccaro, K.; Karahalios, K.; Mulligan, D. K.; Kluttz, D.; and Hirsch, T. 2019. Contestability in algorithmic systems. In 

Companion Publication of the 2019 Conference on Com-puter Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing ,523–527. Van der Vaart, A. W. 2000. Asymptotic statistics , volume 3. Cambridge university press. Vanschoren, J.; N. van Rijn, J.; Bischl, B.; and Torgo, L. 2013. OpenML: Networked Science in Machine Learning. 

SIGKDD Explorations , 15: 49–60. Venkatasubramanian, S.; and Alfano, M. 2020. The philo-sophical basis of algorithmic recourse. In Proceedings of the 2020 conference on fairness, accountability, and trans-parency , 284–293. Von K¨ ugelgen, J.; Karimi, A.-H.; Bhatt, U.; Valera, I.; Weller, A.; and Sch¨ olkopf, B. 2022. On the fairness of causal algorithmic recourse. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence , volume 36, 9584–9594. Vredenburgh, K. 2022. The right to explanation. Journal of Political Philosophy , 30(2): 209–229. Wachter, S.; Mittelstadt, B.; and Russell, C. 2017. Counter-factual explanations without opening the black box: Auto-mated decisions and the GDPR. Harv. JL & Tech. , 31: 841. Wang, Y.; Zhang, T.; Guo, X.; and Shen, Z. 2024. Gradi-ent based feature attribution in explainable AI: A technical review. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.10415 .Watson-Daniels, J.; Parkes, D. C.; and Ustun, B. 2023. Pre-dictive multiplicity in probabilistic classification. In Pro-ceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence ,volume 37, 10306–10314. Wright, C. 2003. Some reflections on the acquisition of war-rant by inference. New essays on semantic externalism and self-knowledge , 57–77. Xin, R.; Zhong, C.; Chen, Z.; Takagi, T.; Seltzer, M.; and Rudin, C. 2022. Exploring the whole rashomon set of sparse decision trees. Advances in neural information processing systems , 35: 14071–14084. Ye, W.; Zheng, G.; Cao, X.; Ma, Y.; and Zhang, A. 2024. Spurious correlations in machine learning: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.12715 .Yurrita, M.; Draws, T.; Balayn, A.; Murray-Rust, D.; Tintarev, N.; and Bozzon, A. 2023. Disentangling fairness perceptions in algorithmic decision-making: the effects of explanations, human oversight, and contestability. In Pro-ceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 1–21. Yurrita, M.; Verma, H.; Balayn, A.; Alfrink, K.; Gadiraju, U.; and Bozzon, A. 2025. Identifying Algorithmic Decision Subjects’ Needs for Meaningful Contestability. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction , 9(7): 1–29. A Philosophical Glossary 

Term Conceptual Definition in the Context of Contestation Epistemic Relating to knowledge, justification, and the degree of rational belief. 

Intuitions Rules of thumb that humans rely on in belief formation and action, for example, monotonicity or continuity rules. 

Ethical Refers to the specific maxims or principles to which a decision-maker commits in guiding their actions and policies. The term does not imply moral justification. 

Inductive Risk The risk of error involved in accepting or rejecting a hypothesis. In lending, this is the risk of misclassifying a “good” loan applicant as “bad” based on incomplete evidence. 

Normative Relating to an evaluative standard or “ought” statement. 

Principle of Total Evidence An epistemic meta-principle stating that beliefs and decisions should always be based on all available evidence. 

Underdetermination A state where multiple jointly incompatible models align equally well with both the observed data and relevant domain knowledge, making it difficult to choose among them. 

# B Proofs 

Theorem 7. Assume ˜x(i) = x(i). Then, two logical relations can be shown: i) If the decision is epistemically contestable, then the model is somewhere contestable. ii) If the decision is somewhere contestable, then the model is somewhere inaccurate. Proof. We start with i), assume that the decision about individual i is epistemically contestable, then ˆd(˜ x(i))̸ = d(x(i)). Since 

˜x(i) = x(i), we know that ˆd(˜ x(i))̸ = d(˜ x(i)). Now because ∥˜x(i) − ˜x(i)∥ = 0 , we can infer that there exists an x ∈ B ϵ(˜ x(i)) : ˆd(x)̸ = d(x), i.e. the decision is weakly epistemically contestable. Consider ii), assume that the decision about individual i is somewhere contestable. This means there exists an x ∈ B ϵ(˜ x(i)) : ˆd(x)̸ = d(x). Consider a particular x′ ∈ B ϵ(˜ x(i)) : ˆd(x′)̸ = d(x′). Then, either ˆp(x′) > τ and p(x′) ≤ τ or ˆp(x′) ≤ τ

and p(x′) > τ . In both cases, this implies p(x′)̸ = ˆp(x′) and because x′ ∈ B ϵ(˜ x(i)), together, we can infer somewhere inaccuracy. 

Theorem 1. If the continuity rule applies to the individual and her counterfactual, and their distance is smaller than ϵ according to ∥ · ∥ , the decision is somewhere contestable. Proof. Let i and ic be individuals to whom the continuity rule applies, then d(˜ x(i)) = d(˜ x(ic)). Since ˜x(ic) is the counterfactual to ˜x(i), we know that ˆd(˜ x(i)) = 0 and ˆd(˜ x(ic)) = 1 or ˆd(˜ x(i)) = 1 and ˆd(˜ x(ic)) = 0 .There now can be two cases: (I) ˆd(˜ x(i))̸ = d(˜ x(i)); (II) ˆd(˜ x(i)) = d(˜ x(i)).If (I), then the decision is epistemically contestable and hence also somewhere contestable as shown in Theorem 7. If (II), then using ˆd(˜ x(i)) = d(˜ x(i)) together with the continuity rule, we can infer that ˆd(˜ x(i)) = d(˜ x(ic)). Since we know that ˜x(ic) is a counterfactual receiving a different decision than ˜x(i), we can infer that ˆd(˜ x(ic))̸ = d(˜ x(ic)). Since we additionally know that their distance is smaller than ϵ, we can infer that the decision is somewhere contestable. 

Theorem 2. Let π be the local environment 13 around ˜x(i), with π = ( π1, . . . , π r ) jointly independent random variables, and let π be constrained by Pπ (|π − ˜x(i)| > ϵ ) = 0 . Assume that the monotonicity intuition applies positively (respectively negatively) to feature k and that the LIME explainer yields wk < 0 (respectively wk > 0). If the local faithfulness of g satisfies LF (g, ˆp) < Vπk [wkπk], then the model is somewhere inaccurate. Proof. We will constrain our proof to the case where the monotonicity rule applies positively to feature k and that the LIME explainer yields wk < 0, the reverse case works analogously. Our proof strategy is to show this theorem by contraposition, i.e. we show that if the model is not somewhere inaccurate, then the local faithfulness must be greater than or equal to Vπk [wkπk].Assume that the model is not somewhere inaccurate. Then, for all x ∈ X with ∥x − ˜x(i)∥ < ϵ holds ˆp(x) = p(x). Since 

Pπ (|π − ˜x(i)| > ϵ ) = 0 , this implies Pπ (ˆ p(π) = p(π)) = 1 .    

> 13 For notational simplicity, we abbreviate the local environment here as πrather than π˜x(i).

We denote π−k := ( π1, . . . , π k−1, π k+1 , . . . , π r ) and obtain LF (g, ˆp) = Eπ [( g(π) − ˆp(π)) 2]

> (i)

= Eπ [( g(π) − p(π)) 2]

> (ii)

= Eπk [Eπ−k |πk [( g(π−k, π k) − p(π−k, π k)) 2 | πk]] 

> (iii)

= Eπk [Eπ−k [( g(π−k, π k) − p(π−k, π k)) 2]] 

> (iv)

≥ Eπk [Eπ−k [g(π−k, π k) − p(π−k, π k)] 2]

> (v)

= Eπk [( wkπk − Eπ−k [p(π−k, π k) −

> r

X

> i=1
> i̸=k

wiπi]) 2]

> (vi)

≥ min    

> p′positive monotonic in k

Eπk [( wkπk − Eπ−k [p(π−k, π k) −

> r

X

> i=1
> i̸=k

wiπi]) 2]

> (vii)

≥ min   

> q′positive monotonic

Eπk [( wkπk − q′(πk)) 2]

> (viii)

= min  

> c∈R

Eπk [( wkπk − c)2]

> (ix)

= Eπk [( wkπk − E[wkπk]) 2]= Vπk [wkπk]

In the derivation, we used the following: (i) Pπ (ˆ p(π) = p(π)) = 1 , which we obtained through the somewhere inaccuracy assumption. (ii) The tower rule for expectations. (iii) The independence of πk and π−k.(iv) Jensen’s inequality. (v) Linearity of expectation value. (vi) By assumption, p is positive monotonic in k. The term is therefore greater than or equal to the minimum over all functions that are positive monotonic in k.(vii) We can define the function q(πk) := Eπ−k [( p(π−k, π k) − rP

> i=1
> i̸=k

wiπi]. We find that if p is positive monotonic in k, then also 

q is monotonically increasing in k. Let z1 ≤ z2, then 

p(π−k, z 1) ≤ p(π−k, z 2) ⇒ p(π−k, z 1) −

> r

X

> i=1
> i̸=k

wiπi ≤ p(π−k, z 2) −

> r

X

> i=1
> i̸=k

wiπi

⇒ Eπ−k [p(π−k, z 1) −

> r

X

> i=1
> i̸=k

wiπi] ≤ Eπ−k [p(π−k, z 2) −

> r

X

> i=1
> i̸=k

wiπi]

⇔ q(z1) ≤ q(z2).

(viii) The smallest approximating positive monotonic unary function to a negative monotonic unary function is a constant. (ix) For an arbitrary function, the constant with the smallest distance according to the mean squared error is the expected value of the function (Hastie et al. 2009). 

Theorem 3. Let i be an individual to whom the reason rule A applies implying a positive (respectively negative) decision and the anchor B applies, leading to a negative (respectively positive) decision with precision prec (B) = 1 − δ and Pπx (B) > 0,and let π be constrained by Pπ (|π − ˜x(i)| > ϵ ) = 0 . If Pπx (A ∩ B) > δ , then the decision is somewhere contestable. Proof. We prove this for the case when the reasons rule A implies a positive decision and the anchor implies a negative decision, the reverse case works analogously. Since B is an anchor with precision 1 − δ, we know that Pπx ( ˆd(πx) = 0 | B) = 1 − δ. By the Kolmogorov axioms, we can infer Pπx ( ˆd(πx) = 1 | B) = δ. Due to our reasons rule, we know that Pπx (d(πx) = 1 | A) = 1 .We now prove our theorem by contraposition and assume that the model is not somewhere contestable. Then, we can infer 

δ = Pπx ( ˆd(πx) = 1 | B) = Pπx ( ˆd(πx) = 1 ∩ B)

Pπx (B)

> (i)

≥ Pπx ( ˆd(πx) = 1 ∩ B ∩ A)

Pπx (B)

> (ii)

= Pπx (d(πx) = 1 ∩ B ∩ A)

Pπx (B)

> (iii)

= Pπx (B ∩ A)

Pπx (B)

> (iv)

≥ Pπx (B ∩ A).

In the derivation we used the following: (i) Adding more sets in the intersection in the probability term of the numerator only reduces the probability. (ii) ∀x ∈ B ϵ(x(i)) : d(x) = ˆd(x) by the assumption that the model is not somewhere contestable and we know that π is constrained by Pπ (|π − ˜x(i)| > ϵ ) = 0 , thus Pπ (d(π) = ˆd(π)) = 1 .(iii) It holds that Pπx (d(πx) = 1 | A) = 1 because the reasons rule applies, which implies that Pπx (d(πx) = 1 ∩ B ∩ A) = 

Pπx (B ∩ A).(iv) As a probability, Pπx (B) always lies between 0 and 1, and by our assumption is strictly greater than 0. Dividing by such a term can only increase the value of the fraction. 

Theorem 4. Let ˆp := S(HD,δ , D ) denote the prediction model used in decision ˆd, obtained from a random draw from HD,δ ,and let RS ˆp denote a Rashomon set. Assume there is no measurement error in the feature values, i.e. ˜x(i) = x(i). Then the probability that ˆp is epistemically incorrect for an individual i can be lower bounded by    

> PHD,δ (d(x(i))̸= ˆd(x(i))) ≥min {PHD,δ ( ˆd(x(i))=1) ,PHD,δ ( ˆd(x(i))=0) }.

We denote this lower bound by θ, which can be estimated via the minimum of the proportions of positive and negative decisions in the Rashomon set, i.e.   

> ˆθRS ˆp:= min

n 1       

> |RS ˆp|
> P
> m∈RS ˆp
> 1ˆdm (x(i))=1 ,1
> |RS ˆp|
> P
> m∈RS ˆp
> 1ˆdm (x(i))=0

o

> .

The estimator is asymptotically consistent, although it systematically underestimates θ in finite samples. 14 

Proof. First, we show that the bound holds. We know that d(x(i)) ∈ { 0, 1}, thus, we prove this by distinguishing two cases. (I) 

d(x(i)) = 0 , then 

PHD,δ (d(x(i))̸ = ˆd(x(i))) = PHD,δ ( ˆd(x(i)) = 1) ≥ min {PHD,δ ( ˆd(x(i)) = 1) , PHD,δ ( ˆd(x(i)) = 0) }.

(II) d(x(i)) = 1 , then 

PHD,δ (d(x(i))̸ = ˆd(x(i))) = PHD,δ ( ˆd(x(i)) = 0) ≥ min {PHD,δ ( ˆd(x(i)) = 1) , PHD,δ ( ˆd(x(i)) = 0) }.

This proves the bound. Now we show asymptotic consistency, define 

ˆπ1 := 1

|RS ˆp|

X

> m∈RS ˆp

1 ˆdm(x(i))=1 , ˆπ0 := 1

|RS ˆp|

X

> m∈RS ˆp

1 ˆdm(x(i))=0 .

Then ˆθRS ˆp = min {ˆπ1, ˆπ0}.

> 14

The finite-sample downward bias can be bounded; see Clark (1961). By the Law of Large Numbers, ˆπ1 and ˆπ0 converge in probability as |RS ˆp| → ∞ , i.e. 

ˆπ1

> p

−→ PHD,δ ( ˆd(x(i)) = 1) , ˆπ0

> p

−→ PHD,δ ( ˆd(x(i)) = 0) .

Since the minimum operator is continuous, the Continuous Mapping Theorem (Van der Vaart 2000) implies 

ˆθRS ˆp = min {ˆπ1, ˆπ0} p

−→ min {PHD,δ ( ˆd(x(i)) = 1) , PHD,δ ( ˆd(x(i)) = 0) } = θ. 

Hence, ˆθRS ˆp is asymptotically consistent. Now we show that the proposed estimator is biased downwards, i.e. EHD,δ [ˆθRS ˆp ] ≤ θ:

EHD,δ [ˆθRS ˆp ] = EHD,δ [min { 1

|RS ˆp|

X

> m∈RS ˆp

1 ˆdm(x(i))=1 , 1

|RS ˆp|

X

> m∈RS ˆp

1 ˆdm(x(i))=0 }]

> ∗

≤ min {EHD,δ [ 1

|RS ˆp|

X

> m∈RS ˆp

1 ˆdm(x(i))=1 ], EHD,δ [ 1

|RS ˆp|

X

> m∈RS ˆp

1 ˆdm(x(i))=0 ]}

= min { 1

|RS ˆp|

X

> m∈RS ˆp

EHD,δ [1 ˆdm(x(i))=1 ], 1

|RS ˆp|

X

> m∈RS ˆp

EHD,δ [1 ˆdm(x(i))=0 ]}

> ∗∗

= min {EHD,δ [1 ˆd(x(i))=1 ], EHD,δ [1 ˆd(x(i))=0 ]}

= min {PHD,δ ( ˆd(x(i)) = 1) , PHD,δ ( ˆd(x(i)) = 0) }

= θ. 

In ∗, we applied Jensen’s inequality, and in ∗∗ , we used that all Rashomon models share the same expected value as ˆp over 

HD,δ .

Theorem 5. Assume the decision model ˆd is epistemically correct, i.e. ˆd = d. If individuals can prove that their true feature values are x(i) rather than ˜x(i), and if ˆd(x(i))̸ = ˆd(˜ x(i)), then the decision is epistemically contestable. Proof. We know that ˆd(˜ x(i))̸ = ˆd(x(i)). Since the decision model ˆd is epistemically reliable, we can infer that d(x(i)) = ˆd(x(i)).Thus, we can infer that ˆd(˜ x(i))̸ = d(x(i)).

Theorem 6. Assume that X and E describe two sets of features. Moreover, assume that the prediction models used are Bayes-optimal relative to X and to X, E , respectively, i.e. ˆpX = pX = P(Y | X) and ˆpX,E = pX,E = P(Y | X, E ). Consequently, 

ˆdX = dX and ˆdX,E = dX,E . Then, the expected number of normatively contestable decisions relative to X is greater than the expected number of normatively contestable decisions relative to X, E , i.e. 

EY,X,E [d∗̸ = ˆdX,E ] ≤ EY,X [d∗̸ = ˆdX ].

Proof. Before proving the theorem, we define a function that will be useful in the proof: 

q′ : X × E → [0 , 1]; ( x, e ) 7 → P(Y = 1 | X = x).

Now, we can prove the theorem: 

EY,X,E [d∗̸ = dX,E ] = EY,X,E [d∗̸ = 1pX,E (X,E )>τ ]

> (i)

= min  

> q

EY,X,E [d∗̸ = 1q(X,E )>τ ]

> (ii)

≤ EY,X,E [d∗̸ = 1q′(X,E )>τ ]

> (iii)

= EY,X [EE|Y,X [d∗̸ = 1q′(X,E )>τ | X, Y ]] 

> (iv)

= EY,X [EE|Y,X [d∗̸ = 1pX (X)>τ | X, Y ]] 

> (v)

= EY,X [d∗̸ = 1pX (X)>τ ]= EY,X [d∗̸ = dX ].

In the derivation we used the following: (i) pX,E is Bayes optimal and thus describes the function with minimal error in expectation over Y, X, E mapping from 

X × E to [0 , 1] .(ii) The minimum over all functions q is smaller than any particular function q′.(iii) The tower rule for expectations. (iv) By definition, 1q(X,E )>τ = 1pX (X)>τ .(v) d∗̸ = 1pX (X)>τ is a random variable that is measurable with respect to the σ−algebra generated by Y, X . Therefore it can be drawn out of the conditional expectation value. 

# C Counterexamples 

For all counterexamples, we work with the same general setup. The decision threshold is given by τ = 0 .5, the locality is defined as ϵ = 0 .1, and the distance norm applied is the absolute distance | · | . Moreover, for all counterexamples, we rely on the same data generating process and prediction model. 

Data generating process: Let the data generating process be defined by (X, Y ), with X a one-dimensional random variable uniformly distributed over the interval [0 , 1] and Y be defined as follows: 

Y =

1 if X + N ≥ 10 else, where N is a noise term defined by a uniform distribution over the interval [0 , 1] . Then, p(x) = P(Y = 1 | X = x) = x. Since 

τ = 0 .5, the epistemically correct decision is given by: 

d(x(i)) = 

1 if x(i) ≥ 0.50 else. 

Prediction model: Let the prediction model be defined by: 

ˆp(x) := 

2x if x < 0.52 − 2x else. Then, the actual decision is given by: 

ˆd(x) := 

1 if 0.25 < x ≤ 0.75 0 else. Now, we have everything set up to construct three counterexamples. For each of the respective theorems, i.e. Theorem 1, Theorem 2, and Theorem 3, we construct cases where the conditions of the respective theorem are satisfied but the decision is not epistemically contestable. 

Counterexample 1. Consider an individual with x(i) = 0 .2 where the features are not subject to measurement error, i.e. 

˜x(i) = x(i). Then, the individual receives a negative decision since ˆd(0 .2) = 0 . A potential counterfactual within an ϵ = 0 .1

environment is x(ic) = 0 .25 because |0.2 − 0.25 | < ϵ and ˆd(0 .25) = 1 . The continuity rule applies for the individual and the counterfactual since d(0 .2) = d(0 .25) = 0 .Consistent with Theorem 1, the decision is somewhere contestable since the counterfactual lies in an ϵ environment around 

x(i) and ˆd(0 .25) = 1 ̸ = 0 = d(0 .25) .However, the decision itself is epistemically correct since ˆd(0 .2) = d(0 .2) = 0 .

Counterexample 2. Consider an individual with x(i) = 0 .6 where the features are not subject to measurement error, i.e. 

˜x(i) = x(i). Then the optimal LIME explanation for ϵ = 0 .1 would be g(x) = 2 − 2x. Note, that the LIME explanation is locally perfectly faithful, i.e. LF (g, ˆp) = 0 . In our example, the monotonicity rule applies positively in x, that means for any two values with x ≥ x′, holds p(x) ≥ p(x′).As shown in Theorem 2, we do find a somewhere inaccuracy, for example, x = 0 .55 lies within an ϵ environment around 

x(i) and it holds that ˆp(0 .55) = 0 .9̸ = 0 .55 = p(0 .55) .However, even in the given local environment, we do not find an epistemically incorrect decision since ∀x ∈ B 0.1(0 .6) : ˆd(x) = d(x) = 1 .

Counterexample 3. Consider an individual with x(i) = 0 .55 where the features are not subject to measurement error, i.e. 

˜x(i) = x(i). The individual receives a positive decision since ˆd(0 .55) = 1 . Let B = [0 .25 , 0.75[ , this constitutes an anchor with perfect precision prec (B) = 1 because in this interval, the model always decides positively. Let A = [0 , 0.5[ be the domain of the reason rule for a negative decision. The reason rule applies as for any x ∈ A : d(x) = 0 . Also, Pπx(i) (A ∩ B) = 1 > 0 = δ.As shown in Theorem 3, we do find a decision in the neighborhood that is epistemically contestable, for example, x = 0 .49 

lies within an ϵ environment around x(i) and it holds that ˆd(0 .49) = 1 ̸ = 0 = d(0 .49) .However, for the individual in question, the decision is epistemically correct since ˆd(0 .55) = d(0 .55) = 1 .D Details Figure 1 

All code needed to reproduce the results in Figure 1 will be made publicly available upon publication; an anonymized version is made available to the reviewers (link in footnote). 15 The examples were coded in Python 3.11 .7 and run on an M3 Pro Chip. Running the code takes less than one hour. Details on packages and versions are provided in the code repository. 

Dataset For the examples, we used the German Credit dataset (available at the UCI Machine Learning Repository (sou 2020), obtained from OpenML (Vanschoren et al. 2013)). It contains 1000 samples with 20 features (a mix of categorical and numerical variables such as requested credit amount, duration, employment status, etc.). The prediction target is binary credit risk classification: Good Credit ( 1) vs Bad Credit ( 0), with a class distribution of 700 good and 300 bad cases. All categorical features were converted to integers via LabelEncoder during preprocessing. 

Models The examples are based on two models: A deep decision tree for LIME and counterfactuals, and a shallow decision tree for anchors. Both the shallow and deep decision trees were fit using scikit-learn (Pedregosa et al. 2011). The data was split into 80% training and 20% test sets using stratified sampling. Categorical features were encoded using label encoding prior to training. The shallow decision tree was constrained to a maximum depth of 3, while the deep decision tree was grown without depth constraints (allowing it to fully expand). Both models used default values for min samples split (2) and 

min samples leaf (1). The shallow tree was designed to produce simple, human-interpretable decision rules, whereas the unconstrained deep tree serves as a baseline representing a more complex, overfitting model. The shallow decision tree (max depth=3) achieves an accuracy of 73.0% with a false negative rate of 7.1%, while the deep decision tree (max depth=16) achieves an accuracy of 68.0% with a false negative rate of 26.4%. We computed three explanation methods on these examples: counterfactuals, LIME, and Anchors. The results are visualized in the main paper in Figure 1. 

Counterfactual Counterfactual explanations were generated using a brute force sparse counterfactual search. That is, we ex-haustively search over one-dimensional changes to the explained instance. The values are taken from the empirical distribution of each feature in the data. We return the counterfactual with the minimal normalized Euclidean distance, which is the Euclidean distance after normalizing the features. This method finds the closest one-dimensional counterfactual. We computed counterfactual explanations for all rejected applicants and report the one with the closest counterfactual. The concerned applicant is recommended to increase the requested amount by just 38 from 1344 to 1382 , which flips the model’s decision. The normalized Euclidean distance is only 0.0137 , meaning that the counterfactual is only 0.0137 standard deviations away from the factual. We report all feature values in the code repository. We note that the counterfactual does not only expose a continuity conflict, like LIME below it, also exposes a monotonicity conflict: Increasing the requested credit amount leads to a more favorable decision. 

LIME LIME explanations were generated using the lime package and the tabular explainer in classification mode, with Chebyshev distance and kernel width 0.5.We compute LIME for the same applicant as in the counterfactual example and find that LIME attributes a positive weight of 

0.0614 to the requested credit amount. According to Theorem 2, a negative relationship but positive LIME weight indicates a monotonicity conflict. From the counterfactual explanation we already know that the model rejects the applicant but accepts them when the requested credit amount is increased by 38 , confirming our analysis. 

Anchor The model anchor was extracted directly from the decision path of the shallow decision tree. For a given instance, the anchor consists of the conjunction of all splitting rules encountered along the path from the root to the leaf node that determines the prediction. For the instance at test index 1 (a false negative where the model predicts “bad credit” but the true label is “good credit”), the decision path yields the following rule: checking status ≤ 1.5 and duration > 31 .5. This anchor has a support of 83 training samples, with the model predicting the negative class for 100% of these samples. As the reason rule, we consider: Applicants with duration > 31 and savings status ≥ 3 should be accepted. The rule has a support of 29 

training samples. The overlap between the model anchor and the prior knowledge rule contains 10 training samples. Thus, there is a clear conflict between the rule and the anchor.