Title: Applying Answer Set Programming with Fuzzy Membership Functions: a Case Study

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.03550v1

Published Time: Tue, 07 Jul 2026 01:40:37 GMT

Number of Pages: 21

Markdown Content:
# Applying Answer Set Programming with Fuzzy Membership Functions: a Case Study 

Luca Ferragina 1[0000 −0003 −3184 −4639] , Ilenia Galati 1[0009 −0006 −3566 −7296] , Lorena Gullone 1[0009 −0004 −8142 −0513] , and Francesco Scarcello 1[0000 −0001 −7765 −1563] 

DIMES Dept., University of Calabria, 87036 Rende (CS), Italy. 

{luca.ferragina,ilenia.galati,lorena.gullone,francesco.scarcello}@unical.it 

Abstract. Human reasoning often operates through qualitative con-cepts expressed by linguistic labels such as high , low , expensive , or cheap ,whose interpretation depends on context and is usually vague, despite being rooted in numerical data. This paper explores a novel fuzzy-logic-based qualitative extension of Answer Set Programming (ASP) to bridge numerical information and qualitative reasoning. The underlying lan-guage, formally introduced in a separate work, provides a principled framework that avoids rigid thresholds and supports robust reasoning under vagueness. Focusing on a representative use case, we illustrate how the framework in-tegrates numerically grounded inputs (such as outputs of machine learn-ing models) with symbolic reasoning over qualitative labels. Key fea-tures, including learning-based membership functions and semantically enriched predicates, enable the combination of expert knowledge, contex-tual factors, and subjective interpretations within a unified declarative setting. 

Keywords: Fuzzy Logic · Answer Set Programming · Neuro-symbolic AI · Membership Functions 

# 1 Introduction 

Recent advances in machine learning have significantly enhanced the ability to extract patterns from unstructured data. However, despite their predictive ac-curacy, such systems often remain difficult to interpret and audit, particularly in applications where decisions must be traceable and grounded in explicit as-sumptions. In contrast, symbolic reasoning frameworks offer transparency and formal rigor, but they typically struggle to capture the continuous, noisy, and context-dependent nature of real-world information. This gap becomes especially evident when expert knowledge is expressed through qualitative notions (e.g., 

high , low , severe , acceptable ) that are inherently vague, even when derived from numerical measurements. Traditional approaches often rely on rigid thresholds to map numerical values to qualitative categories, leading to brittle behavior in which small variations in input may cause abrupt and unintuitive changes in outcomes.  

> arXiv:2607.03550v1 [cs.AI] 3 Jul 2026 2Luca Ferragina, Ilenia Galati, Lorena Gullone, and Francesco Scarcello

Fuzzy logic offers a natural foundation to address this issue by enabling rea-soning with graded truth values. In this work, we build on a novel qualitative, label-based fuzzy extension of Answer Set Programming (ASP), introduced in a companion paper, which explicitly couples linguistic labels with numerically grounded information through membership functions. In this framework, pred-icates are enriched with sets of qualitative labels, and their truth degrees are constrained both by data-driven membership functions (for input predicates) and by semantic compatibility conditions (for derived predicates), expressed through admissible truth profiles. Let us illustrate this point through a rule extracted from a program in a travel recommendation scenario: 

recommend (X, C ; affordable ) ←client (C) ⊙ price (F, C ; cheap ) ⊙

flight (X, F ) ⊙ hotel (X, H )⊙

price (H, C ; cheap )

The predicate recommend has labels infeasible and affordable , while price 

is described by cheap , medium , and expensive . The rule assigns to affordable adegree bounded by the aggregation (via a t-norm ⊙, e.g., ⊙min ) of the body, thus reflecting that affordability depends on both flight and hotel being sufficiently cheap. Note this notion is vague, and the mapping from actual money values to the degree of cheapness is provided by suitable membership functions associated with the predicate price . Such mapping can be determined by those studies that relate the actual perceived value of money for different individuals, typically depending on their annual income. That is, the notion of cheap is not universal, but depends on contextual and subjective factors: $200 is a medium price for a rich customer, but it is very expensive for a low-income customer. Thus, in this fuzzy program, economic status is treated not as a passive filter but as a semantic dimension that adapts the concept definition. In particular, the same travel package can therefore receive different graded valuations of affordability 

from different users. This example reflects a general setting where numerical information (often produced by statistical or learning methods) is integrated into a logical frame-work, allowing experts to express rules naturally while retaining control over graded outcomes. It is worthwhile noting that our language is a direct extension of classical, two-valued ASP, and it naturally permits the definition and manipulation of crisp predicates and rules. Whenever there are only crisp predicates, all fuzzy operators collapse to their classical counterparts, namely conjunction, disjunc-tion, and negation, and we recover precisely Answer Sets semantics. The focus of this paper is on illustrating the practical effectiveness of this ap-proach in a concrete setting, namely damage detection in the production line of screws, arising from a collaboration with an industrial partner. In such environ-ments, automated visual inspection systems produce numerical features (such as defect size, shape irregularity, or color intensity) derived from image processing FLASP: Answer Set Programming with Fuzzy Membership Functions 3

and machine learning components. These features must then be interpreted in qualitative terms that align with domain expertise, such as assessing whether a defect is small , moderate , or severe , and whether a screw is repairable or should be discarded .Our framework enables this transition by associating each qualitative la-bel with a membership function that maps numerical observations to degrees of membership, thus preserving the inherent vagueness of the domain. On top of these input predicates, higher-level concepts are defined through declarative rules, while admissible truth profiles ensure that the resulting qualitative assess-ments remain semantically coherent. This allows the system to detect inconsis-tencies when conflicting evidence arises, and to propagate partial information across related qualitative dimensions. We illustrate how this approach supports a full reasoning pipeline for quality control: from low-level perception, through qualitative abstraction, to decision-making actions such as discard , rework , or accept . The example highlights how numerically grounded data and symbolic rules can be seamlessly integrated, yielding outcomes that are both flexible and aligned with domain-specific inter-pretations. While the formal properties of the language are proved in the com-panion work, this paper emphasizes its role in enabling a robust and expressive modeling of real-world decision processes in a concrete use-case. The main contributions of this paper are: (i) the instantiation of the proposed qualitative fuzzy ASP framework in a realistic industrial damage-detection sce-nario, and (ii) the design and prototyping of a complete reasoning pipeline inte-grating data-driven membership functions with rule-based qualitative inference. 

# 2 Related Works 

The integration of uncertainty in rule-based reasoning has evolved from quantita-tive extensions of logic programming to neuro-symbolic approaches. Early works [25] introduced attenuation factors, while Fuzzy Logic Programming (FLP) [27, 10, 21, 1] adopted a truth-functional view. These ideas were later extended to structured formalisms such as Description Logics and Answer Set Programming (ASP). Handling uncertainty with non-monotonic negation has been studied in gen-eralized logic programs. Parametric Deductive Databases were extended in [16, 17] with approximate well-founded semantics and lattice-based frameworks. In parallel, multi-adjoint logic programming was enriched with non-monotonic rea-soning [8, 9], providing expressive semantics and translations to simpler frag-ments. In fuzzy Description Logics [24, 7, 18], vagueness is modeled via membership functions while preserving decidability. In ASP, fuzzy extensions [2, 12] gen-eralize stable models using [0 , 1] truth degrees. CFASP [13] showed that many constructs can be reduced to a core language. Further studies addressed negation and inconsistency [6, 26], introducing notions such as unfounded-freeness. Fuzzy Linguistic Logic Programming [15] instead performs reasoning directly over lin-4 Luca Ferragina, Ilenia Galati, Lorena Gullone, and Francesco Scarcello 

guistic terms. More recently, fuzzy Datalog with existential rules [14] achieved high expressivity while retaining tractable data complexity. Neuro-symbolic AI complements these developments by combining learning and reasoning. Deep-ProbLog [19] and NeurASP [28], along with SLASH [23], integrate neural out-puts into probabilistic or ASP-based reasoning, while Logic Tensor Networks [4] embed logical constraints into differentiable frameworks. Note that all these approaches clarify, from different perspectives, how non-monotonic reasoning, uncertainty management, and graded truth can coexist. However, they do not consider membership functions and qualitative labels as main components of the semantics of programs, which includes dealing with the implicit constraints based on how membership functions of qualitative labels may co-vary. 

# 3 Preliminaries 

In this section, we introduce the core elements of our language, including its syntax, the fundamental components of its semantics, and the main algorithm underlying the inference process. 

3.1 Syntax of FLASP A program Π in FLASP includes a set C of constants, a set of V variables, and a set P of predicate symbols. Constants and variables play the same role as in standard logic programming. Predicates, however, are enriched with additional structure to capture linguistic terms and fuzzy information. As usual in Datalog, we distinguish two classes of predicate symbols in P:

– Input (or extensional , EDB) predicates, whose truth degrees are given as inputs to the program; 

– Derived (or intensional , IDB) predicates, whose truth degrees are obtained by rule-based inference within the program. We write p(x; ℓ) for the atom obtained from p, an argument tuple x, and a label ℓ ∈ Λp, and we read its truth degree as the degree of membership of x

in the fuzzy concept named by ℓ. Each predicate symbol p(k) ∈ P of arity k is associated with a triple ⟨Λp, Mp, Σ p⟩, where Λp is a finite set of linguistic labels 

describing the linguistic domain of p, Mp is a family of membership functions ,and Σp is a collection of S-norms .For each label ℓ ∈ Λp, the set Σp provides an associated S-norm Sℓ : [0 , 1] ×

[0 , 1] → [0 , 1] , which satisfies commutativity, associativity, monotonicity, and the boundary condition Sℓ(x, 0) = x. Typical examples include the Gödel S-norm, defined as Smax (x, y ) = max( x, y ), and the probabilistic sum, defined as 

Sprob (x, y ) = x + y − x · y. The S-norm Sℓ aggregates the contributions to the truth/membership value for label ℓ from the rules defining atoms over predicate 

p, while membership functions are used to determine the degree to which a given value satisfies a linguistic label. FLASP: Answer Set Programming with Fuzzy Membership Functions 5

Membership Functions. For an EDB predicate p, the family Mp contains, for each label ℓ ∈ Λp, a membership function μℓ : D → [0 , 1] , where D denotes the cartesian product of the domains of the underlying variables. Each function μℓ

assigns to a tuple x ∈ D a degree of membership in the fuzzy set associated with the label ℓ. Membership functions are fixed a priori , for instance on the basis of domain expertise or by means of machine learning techniques applied to data [20]. The resulting membership degree μℓ(x) is interpreted in the standard fuzzy-set-theoretic sense: μℓ(x) = 0 denotes non-membership, μℓ(x) = 1 denotes full membership, and intermediate values express partial membership (see Figure 1). It is convenient to view Mp as a single function Mp : D → [0 , 1] Λp , where each component supplies the result for one label. The set of all compatible label-vectors, 

γp := M p(D) ⊆ [0 , 1] Λp ,

is precisely the image of Mp, and plays for EDB predicates the same role as the admissible truth profile defined below for IDB predicates: it records which combinations of label-truth degrees can actually occur. For a derived predicate IDB p, we would like to compute membership values by means of program rules, according to the intended semantics of the pro-gram. However, not every combination of truth values for the labels are logically meaningful, thus for IDB predicates we are interested in the membership-values compatibility set γp. With this respect, it is convenient to represent it in a para-metric way, with respect to a parameter t, so that γp is a mapping 

γp : [ ap, b p] → [0 , 1] Λp , γp(t) =  γp(t)ℓ

 

> ℓ∈Λp

,

where the closed interval [ap, b p] is the parametrization domain, and ∀t ∈ [0 , 1] ,

γp(t) = ( γp(t)ℓ)ℓ∈Λp represents a coherent assignment of truth degrees to all labels of p. Intuitively, γp describes the intended semantic structure of the pred-icate p: each label ℓ ∈ Λp corresponds to one dimension of the truth space, and the curve γp encodes how these labels may consistently co-vary. 

Terms, literals, rules, programs. A term is either a constant c ∈ C or a variable 

x ∈ V . A fuzzy literal is an expression of the form p(x; ℓ) or ¬N p(x; ℓ), where 

p ∈ P is a predicate symbol of arity k, x = ( x1, . . . , x k) is a tuple of terms, and ℓ ∈ Λp is a linguistic label associated with p.1 The former is referred to as a (positive or directed ) atom, while the latter as a negated atom. Formally, a negated atom is denoted as N (p) where N : [0 , 1] → [0 , 1] is a decreasing function that satisfies N (0) = 1 and N (1) = 0 . Typical negator examples include the 

Łukasiewicz Negator NL(x) = 1 − x and the Gödel Negator NG(x) = 1 if x = 0 

or NG(x) = 0 otherwise. A fuzzy Datalog rule is an expression of the form 

h ← b1 ⊙T · · · ⊙ T bm,  

> 1In the examples, we omit the label if there is only one label and it is irrelevant, for instance for crisp EDB predicates. 6Luca Ferragina, Ilenia Galati, Lorena Gullone, and Francesco Scarcello

where the head h is a (positive) fuzzy atom and the body consists of a (possibly empty) conjunction of fuzzy literals b1, . . . , b m. The operator ⊙T denotes con-junction interpreted via some T-norm T . Intuitively, the body specifies a set of conditions whose satisfaction contributes to the truth value of the head. For a rule r, denote by H(r) its head atom and by B(r) the set of literals in its body where B+(r) and B−(r) denote, respectively, the sets of positive and of negated atoms occurring in the body of r. Then, consider a (ground) atom h,and denote by Rh the set of rules having h as their head. We assume the existence of a reserved predicate const (x; ℓc), where x is some constant term. It is used to encode constant truth values within rules and is equipped with the membership function ℓc(x) = 1 , assigning truth value 1 to any given term x. We write const (v; ℓc) to inject the numeric truth value v.The logical conjunction and is modeled by a T-norm T : [0 , 1] × [0 , 1] →

[0 , 1] , which satisfies commutativity, associativity, monotonicity, and the bound-ary condition T (x, 1) = x. Commonly used examples include the Gödel T-norm Tmin (x, y ) = min( x, y ), the product T-norm Tprod (x, y ) = x · y, and the Łukasiewicz T-norm TL(x, y ) = max(0 , x + y − 1) .A fuzzy (Datalog) program Π is a finite set of rules. A fact is a rule with empty body. The grounding of a program Π is obtained by replacing all variables occurring in Π with constants from the domain. A program is said to be ground 

if it contains no variables. The Herbrand domain HC of a program Π is the set of all constants appearing in Π. The Herbrand base BΠ is the set of all ground fuzzy atoms that can be constructed from the predicate symbols in P and the constants in HC .

3.2 Semantics 

A fuzzy interpretation I is a function I : BΠ → [0 , 1] that assigns a truth degree to each ground atom p(C; ℓ) in the Herbrand base BΠ . The value I p(C; ℓ) is interpreted as a truth degree of the atom with respect to the label ℓ, or as a degree of membership to the fuzzy set ℓ. As we discuss below, classical (crisp) atoms can be modeled as atoms with a membership function having binary values only. Denote by p(C; ·) the basic unlabeled version of any ground atom with over predicate p and with terms C. By abusing notation, we simply refer to it as an atom. 

Membership functions. An interpretation I is said to be consistent if, for every atom p(C; ·), the truth values over its linguistic labels are compatible according to γ, that is,   I p(C; ℓ)   

> ℓ∈Λp

∈ γp (1) Equation (1) therefore requires that truth degrees of p(C, ·) according to I

belong to the admissible region γp (or they are all zero—recall that 0Λp ∈ γ, if this atom is false at all). Note that we do not allow arbitrary and independent FLASP: Answer Set Programming with Fuzzy Membership Functions 7

truth values to individual labels, because membership functions carry out se-mantic information. Typically, e.g., it is impossible that an atom corresponding to some physical measure has a high membership value for both the label “fast” and the label “slow”. In our language, however, the membership functions encoded in γ play a much more central role than mere consistency checking: they are directly involved in the inference process, since once a truth value for a predicate p is derived for a label, the profile γp can propagate consistent truth values to other labels (line 6 of Algorithm 1). More precisely, if I(p(C; ℓ)) = v, then the profile γp determines a set of admissible tuples in [0 , 1] Λp containing v as the component for ℓ, and the inference step selects (e.g., minimally) a tuple t ∈ γp such that t(ℓ) ≥ v,assigning I(p(C; ℓ′)) ≥ t(ℓ′) for every other label ℓ′ ∈ Λp.By this mechanism, partial evidence derived for a single label can be extended to a semantically coherent interpretation over all labels, preserving the intended qualitative relationships encoded in γp and avoiding arbitrary or inconsistent assignments. This feature can also be exploited to allow a single predicate p to exhibit both a fuzzy and a crisp behavior. For instance, p can be equipped with two la-bels, e.g., fuzzy and crisp , each associated with a different membership function: a continuous increasing function (e.g., linear or even the identity on [0 , 1] ) for 

fuzzy , and a 0-1 step function at a fixed cutoff value for crisp (see Figure 2). In this setting, the label fuzzy is used in the head of fuzzy rules to derive graded truth values, while the γ-propagation mechanism automatically induces a cor-responding Boolean value for p(·; crisp ), which will be either 1 if the threshold degree exceeds the given cutoff, or 0 otherwise. By construction, the label crisp thus exhibits a crisp behavior, which can be seamlessly used in subsequent (standard ASP) rule layers requiring Boolean semantics. This pattern is indeed exploited in the program of Figures 3, 4 and 5, where predicates such as discard , discount , and repair are first derived fuzzily and then used within a purely crisp decision component, by means of their crisp (binary valued) labels. 

Models and Answer Sets. For a rule r, I(B(r)) is obtained by applying the T-norm Tr to the interpretation I(bi) of all literals bi ∈ B(r). Recall that Tr is associative and commutative. Then, I(Rh) denotes the application of the co-norm associated with h to the interpretation of all body rules defining h, that is, I(Rh) = Sh{ I (B(r) | r ∈ Rh }.A model of a fuzzy program Π is a consistent interpretation I (in the sense of Equation (1)) such that all rules in Π are satisfied. That is, for each head atom h, it holds that 

I(h) ≥ I (Rh) (2) We write I | = Π to denote that I is a model of Π.

Definition 1 (Minimal model). An interpretation I for a program Π is said to be minimal w.r.t. a given set of interpretations W , if there exists no other 8 Luca Ferragina, Ilenia Galati, Lorena Gullone, and Francesco Scarcello 

interpretation I′ ∈ W (I′̸ = I), such that I′(¯ p) ≤ I (¯ p), for every ground atom 

¯p.An interpretation I is called a minimal model of Π, if it is minimal w.r.t. to the set of all models of Π.

It is easy to see that a program may have many minimal models, even in-finitely many, or no model at all. However, we are interested in those models that are maximally supported by the program rules. 

Definition 2 (Tight Interpretations). Let I and I′ be interpretations of a fuzzy program Π. We say that I is tight w.r.t. I′ if, for every (unlabeled) atom 

p(C; ·), there is a maximal set of critical labels, whose membership values are the lowest possible to satisfy their defining rules w.r.t. the given I′. That is, for every such a label ℓ∗, said ¯p = p(C; ℓ∗), we have I(¯ p) = I′(R¯p). If I = I′, we just say it is a tight interpretation. 

Tight minimal models contain no superfluous truth information: decreasing the truth (membership) value of a label necessarily destroys model-hood (either by violating consistency or by failing to satisfy some rule). They are maximally informative solutions compatible with both the rules of the program and the semantic constraints imposed by γ. If a program has a unique tight minimal model, that model is called the least model of the program. Given an interpretation I of a fuzzy program Π, define the reduct ΠI of Π

with respect to I as the set of rules P i I = { rI | r ∈ Π }, where each rule rI

is obtained from r by replacing every negated body atom ¬N b with a (positive) atom const (N (I(b)); ℓc). That is, we assume the truth values of negative literals are correct. By construction, ΠI is a positive fuzzy program. 

Definition 3 (Fuzzy answer set). An interpretation I is an answer set of Π

if I is a tight minimal model of the reduct ΠI .

Let I be an interpretation for a program Π. Let WI be the set of inter-pretations I′ that satisfy all rules according to I, that is, for every atom ¯h,

I′(¯h) ≥ I (R¯h).We define the immediate consequence operator as the mapping TΠ : [0 , 1] BΠ →P [0 , 1] BΠ

 such that TΠ (I) is the set of the tight interpretations in WI that are minimal w.r.t. WI . Moreover, for a set of interpretations I, define TΠ (I) = 

{TΠ (I) | I ∈ I} .

Definition 4 ( γ-monotonic programs). A program Π is called γ-monotonic 

if, for each rule r ∈ Π the component function γp(t)ℓ : [ ap, b p] → [0 , 1] relative to the predicate p and the linguistic label ℓ that appears in H(r) is continuous and (strictly) increasing on [ap, b p].

It can be shown that the γ-monotonicity property of a program Π guaran-tees the existence of a least model, which can be computed via Algorithm 1. In contrast, non-monotonic membership profiles may induce nondeterministic behavior, giving rise to multiple tight minimal models. FLASP: Answer Set Programming with Fuzzy Membership Functions 9

Algorithm 1: Fixpoint iteration. 

Input: Positive γ-monotonic fuzzy program 

Output: Least model M∗ (or NoModel ) 

> 1

Construct the Herbrand base BΠ ; 

> 2

Initialize I ← ⊥ ; 

> 3

repeat 

// Deterministic one-step operator bT 

> 4

foreach grounded atom p(C; ·) do 

// rule-induced lower bounds  

> 5

foreach ℓ ∈ Λp do  

> 6

bℓ ← I (Rp(C;ℓ));

// unique tight propagation via γp 

> 7

A ← { t ∈ [ap, b p] | γp(t)ℓ ≥ bℓ ∀ℓ ∈ Λp }; 

> 8

if A = ∅ then  

> 9

return NoModel  

> 10

α ← min A; 

> 11

foreach ℓ ∈ Λp do  

> 12

I′(p(C; ℓ)) ← γp(α)ℓ; 

> 13

I ← I ′; 

> 14

until I′ = I; 

> 15

return M∗ ← I ;

Furthermore, as observed in other fuzzy logic-based frameworks [13] even in the monotonic setting, the inference procedure may fail to terminate in a finite number of steps, due to a lack of convergence to the least model. In the framework considered in this paper, however, this is not an issue because we restrict ourselves to a fragment that guarantees polynomial time evaluation (for programs with stratified negation). 

# 4 Case Study: Industrial Quality Control 

In this section, we present a program Πcontrol for a case study arising from a collaboration with an industrial partner, aimed at analyzing images acquired from a screws production line. The goal is threefold: (i) to detect the presence of damages, (ii) to assess their severity, and (iii) to determine the appropriate action for defective items. As a benchmark, we rely on the well-known MVTec dataset [5], which contains images of objects categorized as normal or defective, with various types of damages. The implemented system can be conceptually divided into two layers: the first, sub-symbolic, is based on machine learning algorithms that provide the val-ues for the membership functions of the input (EDB) predicates of the symbolic layer. The latter, based on fuzzy reasoning, logically combines this information through the program Πcontrol , shown in Figures 3, 4, and 5. to obtain the desired results according to the (vague) indications of domain experts. 10 Luca Ferragina, Ilenia Galati, Lorena Gullone, and Francesco Scarcello 

Note that Πcontrol has two modules: the first one, which defines the fuzzy predicates linked to the sub-symbolic methods that process input images, iden-tifies anomalous products and extracts relevant linguistic features describing the detected damages. The second one consists of crisp rules that, based on the in-ferred qualitative descriptions, support decision-making about the handling of defective items. In fact, the proposed language allows us to seamlessly combine rules and predicates with fuzzy values with rules having crisp truth values, which behave exactly as in standard ASP programs. Each item is defined by a tuple (X, I ), where each instance of X is a unique identifier associated with an image tensor I. The information is enriched by a neural-generated anomaly heatmap H linked to the image I. The anomaly heatmap H highlights pixels corresponding to potential surface defects. This is described by the two facts object (X, I ) and anomaly (I, H ). Note that these facts are encoded by crisp predicates, indeed we omit linguistic labels in these predicates (formally, we should use a dummy label, say true , with a binary membership function). The sub-symbolic layer combines: (i) AE-XAD [3], a recent explainable anomaly detection method based on autoencoders, and (ii) three instances of fuzzy k-means clustering [22]. The adoption of AE-XAD is primarily motivated by its ability to produce interpretable anomaly heatmaps that highlight specific pix-els corresponding to potential surface defects, providing localized and explain-able visual evidence. Furthermore, we rely on fuzzy k-means to characterize each detected damage in terms of area dimension, shape eccentricity, color in-tensity, distance from the center of the image, and solidity. The choice of a fuzzy clustering approach is crucial to manage the ambiguity of irregular shapes and physical defects. Instead of forcing a rigid threshold, it provides graded truth degrees that naturally define the membership functions of the input EDB predicates ( area_dimension , eccentricity , color_intensity , distance , and 

solidity ), preserving the vagueness of the domain. The linguistic labels of these predicates are reported in the first block of Table 1, and the corresponding mem-bership functions are displayed in Figure 1. 

Fig. 1: Membership functions of the predicates area_dimension , eccentricity ,and color_intensity , obtained from sub-simbolic components. FLASP: Answer Set Programming with Fuzzy Membership Functions 11 

It is important to note that the raw truth degrees produced by sub-symbolic com-ponents (e.g., fuzzy k-means) may occasionally exhibit semantically unintuitive behaviors, such as assigning non-zero degrees to both small and large without a clearly dominant medium value, as observed for the predicates area_dimension ,

eccentricity , and color_intensity in the program Πcontrol (see Figure 1). Such phenomena are intrinsic to membership functions derived from machine learning systems. However, as we show later, the symbolic fuzzy component of our framework is robust to these irregularities: by enforcing semantic constraints and leveraging well-designed rules, it mitigates the imprecision of sub-symbolic outputs, yielding more coherent, precise, and interpretable results.        

> (a) Predicates discard and
> repair .
> (b) Predicate discount .(c) Predicates severity
> and defect .

Fig. 2: Membership functions for the predicates discard , discount , repair , and 

severity . The predicates discard and repair are equipped with a simple fuzzy-to-crisp pattern, with a continuous label ( fuzzy ) and a corresponding Boolean label ( crisp ) obtained via a single cutoff. The predicate discount instead adopts a multi-threshold scheme, where three distinct step functions map the fuzzy degree to crisp decisions corresponding to different discount levels (50% and 70%). The predicates severity and defect are entirely fuzzy (no crisp labels) with γ-monotonic truth profiles. 

Πcontrol Rules. The symbolic layer of Πcontrol employs a set of rules to evaluate anomaly severity, classify defects, and determine the optimal handling strategy. Initially, the framework assesses the overall severity of detected anomalies by evaluating their geometric and visual features, assigning, by means of the rules (P1) and (P2), high severity to anomalies with significant area, high eccentricity, or elevated color intensity, while classifying small, faint anomalies as low severity, through rule (P3). At the same level, the rules (P4), (P5), and (P6) semantically distinguish between functional and aesthetic defects based on the physical traits of the screws. Functional defects are typically characterized by low solidity or specific combinations of small size, low color intensity, and high distance from the center, whereas aesthetic damages are identified through high solidity, low distance, and medium color intensity. In particular, note that the parts farthest from the center are precisely the head and the tip of the screw, whose possible 12 Luca Ferragina, Ilenia Galati, Lorena Gullone, and Francesco Scarcello 

absence in the image is clearly associated with defects that compromise the functionality of the screw under examination. Based on these inferred classifications and their corresponding truth degrees, the subsequent block of rules infers the appropriate handling actions. Objects are flagged for discarding if they exhibit severe functional defects (rules (P7) and (P8)), or multiple critical aesthetic anomalies (rule (P9)). On the other hand, rule (P10) provides a recommendation for discounting of objects with high-severity aesthetic damages. Repair strategies, encoded in rules (P11) and (P12), are assigned based on the defect profile: internal repairs target minor aesthetic flaws lacking severe functional implications, while external repairs are reserved for minor functional defects requiring specialized processing. That is, minor damages can be handled internally by the company, whereas more severe but still repairable damages must be delegated to specialized external companies. Finally, items designated for external repair that do not meet the crisp discard criteria are automatically routed to an available repair company (rule (P13)) and the price of the items designated for discount is updated (rules (P14), (P15), (P16)). We point out that these final rules behave precisely as in standard ASP, because all their body predicates use only binary (crisp) step membership func-tions, and thus will be either (entirely) true or (entirely) false in any interpreta-tion of the program. To see how this works, consider for instance the predicate 

discard : the compatibility γ of membership functions (see Figure 2) implies that any fuzzy_level value exceeding a certain threshold automatically sets the value 1 (entirely true) for the step membership function we have called crisp ,which is then used in the subsequent rules (e.g., rule (P13)). The same happens for predicates repair and discount .Moreover, it is important to note that some rules of Πcontrol exhibit pecu-liar labels containing the symbols ≥ and ≤. For example, in the rule (P5), the predicate color_intensity is used with the label ≤ medium . Intuitively, this expression extends the linguistic notion of at least medium . Formally, these la-bels are in fact additional membership functions that are usually obtained by combining other membership functions of the same predicate. In the consid-ered program, this combination is performed by means of the probabilistic sum operator, e.g., p(; ≥ medium ) = p(; medium ) + p(; high ) − p(; medium ) · p(; high ).

4.1 Examples of Evaluation 

In this section, we present the derivation for two specific instances (displayed in Figure 6). In this application we explicitly evaluate the t-norm and s-norm using the min and max operators respectively, for every clause in the extended Πcontrol 

program. The min operator ensures that when aggregating multiple conditions in a rule body (e.g., determining if a defect is highly severe), the resulting truth degree is strictly bounded by the weakest piece of evidence. Conversely, the max 

operator (s-norm) guarantees that when multiple, independent rules derive the same concept for an item, the strongest available evidence dictates the final FLASP: Answer Set Programming with Fuzzy Membership Functions 13 

Predicate Linguistic Labels 

area_dimension {small, medium, large }

eccentricity {low, medium, high }

color_intensity {low, medium, high }

solidity {low, medium, high }

distance {low, medium, high }

severity {low, medium, high }

defect {low, medium, high }

discard {f uzzy _level, crisp }

discount {f uzzy _level, disc 50 , disc 70 }

repair {f uzzy _level, crisp }

Table 1: Corresponding set of labels for each predicate. 

Πcontrol : Industrial Quality Control Program 

severity (X, H ; high ) ← object (X, I ) ⊙min anomaly (I, H )⊙min 

area _dimension (I, H ; large )⊙min 

eccentricity (I, H ; high )

(P1) 

severity (X, H ; high ) ← object (X, I ) ⊙min anomaly (I, H ) ⊙min 

color _intensity (I, H ; ≥ medium ) ⊙min 

eccentricity (I, H ; high )

(P2) 

severity (X, H ; low ) ← object (X, I ) ⊙min anomaly (I, H ) ⊙min 

color _intensity (I, H ; ≤ medium ) ⊙min 

area _dimension (I, H ; low )

(P3) 

defect (I, H, f unctional ; high ) ← anomaly (I, H )⊙min 

area _dimension (I, H ; small ) ⊙min 

distance (I, H ; high )⊙min 

color _intensity (I, H ; low )

(P4) 

defect (I, H, f unctional ; high ) ← anomaly (I, H )⊙min 

color _intensity (I, H ; ≤ medium )⊙min 

solidity (I, H ; low )⊙min 

distance (I, H ; medium )

(P5) 

defect (I, H, aesthetic ; high ) ← anomaly (I, H )⊙min 

color _intensity (I, H ; medium ) ⊙min 

solidity (I, H ; high )⊙min 

distance (I, H ; low )

(P6) 

Fig. 3: The Fuzzy Datalog program Πcontrol . Defect identification. classification. This prevents severe defects from being smoothed out or averaged down by less critical features. 14 Luca Ferragina, Ilenia Galati, Lorena Gullone, and Francesco Scarcello 

Πcontrol : Industrial Quality Control Program 

discard (X; f uzzy _level ) ← object (X, I ) ⊙min anomaly (I, H ) ⊙min 

defect (I, H, f unctional ; high )⊙min 

severity (X, H ; medium )

(P7) 

discard (X; f uzzy _level ) ← object (X, I ) ⊙min anomaly (I, H ) ⊙min 

defect (I, H, f unctional ; medium )⊙min 

severity (X, H ; high )

(P8) 

discard (X; f uzzy _level ) ← object (X, I ) ⊙min anomaly (I, H 1)⊙min 

anomaly (I, H 2)⊙min 

defect (I, H 1, aesthetic ; high ) ⊙min 

defect (I, H 2, aesthetic ; high )⊙min 

H1̸ = H2

(P9) 

discount (X; f uzzy _level ) ← object (X, I ) ⊙min anomaly (I, H ) ⊙min 

defect (I, H, aesthetic ; high )⊙min 

severity (X, H ; high )

(P10) 

repair (X, self ; f uzzy _level ) ← object (X, I ) ⊙min anomaly (I, H ) ⊙min 

defect (I, H, aesthetic ; ≤ medium ) ⊙min 

¬Łdefect (I, H, f unctional ; high )

(P11) 

repair (X, external ; f uzzy _level ) ← object (X, I ) ⊙min anomaly (I, H ) ⊙min 

defect (I, H, f unctional ; low ) ⊙min 

¬Łdefect (I, H, aesthetic ; low )

(P12) 

Fig. 4: The Fuzzy Datalog program Πcontrol . Fuzzy possible evaluation. In real-world scenarios, the transition between qualitative concepts—such as moving from a (at least) medium to a (at least) high severity—is rarely abrupt. We adopt a smooth approach , as shown in Figure 2c, which provides continuous transitions for such notions. We define our admissible monotonic truth profiles γ by mapping each ordered label ℓi to a shifted logistic sigmoid [11]: 

f (t; k, c i) = σ k(t − ci) = 11 + e−k(t−ci)

where k > 0 governs the steepness and ci ∈ (0 , 1) determines the threshold cen-ter. We fix k = 20 , allowing the closed-form inverse derivation of the parameter value t = ci + 120 ln 

 y

> 1−y



.For a predicate like severity with three ordinal labels ( low , medium , high ), the profile maps a curve to each threshold using monotonically increasing centers FLASP: Answer Set Programming with Fuzzy Membership Functions 15 

Πcontrol : Industrial Quality Control Program 

send (X, A ) ← object (X, I ) ⊙min repair (X, external ; crisp ) ⊙min 

¬Łdiscard (X; crisp ) ⊙min available _company (A) (P13) 

sell (X, P ) ← object (X, I ) ⊙min original _price (X, P 0) ⊙min 

discount (X; disc 50) ⊙min P = P0 ∗ 0.5 ⊙min 

¬Łdiscard (X; crisp )

(P14) 

sell (X, P ) ← object (X, I ) ⊙min original _price (X, P 0) ⊙min 

discount (X; disc 70) ⊙min P = P0 ∗ 0.7 ⊙min 

¬Łdiscard (X; crisp )

(P15) 

sell (X, P ) ← object (X, I ) ⊙min original _price (X, P )⊙min 

¬Łdiscard (X; crisp ) ⊙min ¬Łdiscount (X; disc 50) ⊙min 

¬Łdiscount (X; disc 70) 

(P16) 

Fig. 5: The Fuzzy Datalog program Πcontrol . Crisp decision. 

c1 = 0 .20 , c2 = 0 .50 , and c3 = 0 .80 :

γseverity (t) =  f (t; 20 , 0.20) , f (t; 20 , 0.50) , f (t; 20 , 0.80) 

The final decision stage of the pipeline is modeled through the predicates 

discard , discount , and repair .As explained above, these predicates are equipped with linguistic labels that enable a transition from fuzzy evaluations to crisp behaviors by means of their associated membership functions depicted in Figure 2. In more detail, the pred-icates discard and repair are defined with two labels, fuzzy_level and crisp :the former is associated with a continuous increasing membership function (in our case, linear in [0 , 1] ), while the latter is defined via a step function with a cutoff, fixed in this example at 0.5. This means that a fuzzy degree assigned to 

discard (X; fuzzy_level ) (respectively repair (X; fuzzy_level )) is turned into a crisp value for discard (X; crisp ) (respectively repair (X; crisp )), which is 1 if the degree is at least 0.5, and 0 otherwise. The predicate discount follows a similar approach, but it is associated with two crisp labels corresponding to different discount levels, namely disc50 and 

disc70 . Each of these labels is defined by a step membership function with thresh-olds set to 0.4 and 0.7, respectively. As a result, the fuzzy degree computed for 

discount (X; fuzzy_level ) is mapped, via the γ-propagation mechanism, to either crisp discount decision depending on which thresholds are exceeded. Note that the threshold values associated with the fuzzy-to-crisp predicates are meant to capture a specific decision policy and are application-dependent design parameters. Future work will investigate data-driven approaches for au-tomatically learning these thresholds, in addition to the shape and parameters of the underlying membership functions. 16 Luca Ferragina, Ilenia Galati, Lorena Gullone, and Francesco Scarcello  

> (a) Manipulated Front Anomaly. (b) Two Scratch Anomalies.

Fig. 6: Two input examples with corresponding AE-XAD anomaly explanations. 

Instance 1: Manipulated Front Anomaly. Let X1 be the item featuring a sin-gle manipulated front anomaly H (as seen in Figure 6a). In this scenario, the geometric evaluation maps the defect to a functional anomaly. We focus the explicit derivation on the severity predicate to showcase the continuous latent inference. First, we compute the required compound labels via probabilistic sum ( a ⊕ b = a + b − a · b): 

color _intensity (X1, H ; ≤ medium ) = 0 .998 ⊕ 0.002 = 0 .998 

color _intensity (X1, H ; ≥ medium ) = 0 .002 ⊕ 0.000 = 0 .002 

Next, we evaluate the lower bounds dictated by rules (P1–P2) using the min 

t-norm over the geometric memberships:                

> severity (H;high )←max  min(0 .020 ,0.074) ,min(0 .002 ,0.074) = 0 .020 (P1, P2)
> severity (H;low )←min(0 .998 ,0.909) = 0 .909 (P3)

With the constraints high ≥ 0.020 and low ≥ 0.909 , we map the evaluations to the latent state t using the inverse sigmoid. The constraint on high (c3 = 0 .80 )imposes t ≥ 0.80 + 0 .05 ln(0 .020 /0.980) = 0 .605 . This is strictly greater than the requirement for low (t ≥ 0.315 ). Thus, substituting the strictest bound t = 0 .605 

back into the γseverity profile provides the fully coherent semantic state 

severity (H; ·) with labels {low = 0 .999 , medium = 0 .892 , high = 0 .020 }.

The framework successfully infers a strong medium severity (interpreted as “at least medium” because these monotonic function encode a cumulative behav-ior), despite the absence of an explicit rule, naturally bridging the gap between the low and high evaluations. Processing the morphological variables through rules (P4–P5) yields a con-fident classification for a functional defect ( defect (I, H, f unctional ; high ) = 0.909 ), primarily driven by the anomaly’s localized area and its position at the object’s boundaries. 

discard (X1; f uzzy _level )) ← min(0 .909 , 0.892) = 0 .892 

Because of the threshold profile γdiscard (with cutoff 0.5), we get a definitive crisp action: discard( X1; crisp ) = 1 .FLASP: Answer Set Programming with Fuzzy Membership Functions 17 

Instance 2: Two Scratch Anomalies (Image 6b). Let X2 be an item presenting two candidate anomaly regions identified by the sub-symbolic layer, denoted as 

HA (Component 1) and HB (Component 2) (Figure 6b). We evaluate the severity profiles independently for both components. For HA, we compute the aggregated bounds via probabilistic sum ( color _intensity (X2, H A; ≤ medium ) = 0 .043 ⊕

0.953 = 0 .955 ) and apply rules (P1–P3): 

severity (HA; high ) ← max   min(0 .037 , 0) , min(0 .953 , 0)  = 0 .000 

severity (HA; low ) ← min(0 .955 , 0.264) = 0 .264 

With bounds high ≥ 0 and low ≥ 0.264 , the strictest latent state is t = 0 .148 .Substituting this into γseverity yields the following profile for the first component 

severity (HA, ·): {low = 0 .261 , medium = 0 .001 , high = 0 .000 }. Conversely, for the region HB , the probabilistic sum yields color _intensity (X2, H B ; ≤

medium ) = 0 .056 ⊕0.938 = 0 .941 and color _intensity (X2, H B ; ≥ medium ) = 0.938 . Then, 

severity (HB ; high ) ← max   min(0 .038 , 0.026) , min(0 .938 , 0.026)  = 0 .026 

severity (HB ; low ) ← min(0 .941 , 0.272) = 0 .272 

Here, the constraint on high governs the latent inference, forcing t ≥ 0.80 + 0.05 ln(0 .026 /0.974) = 0 .619 . The semantic state naturally bridges the evalua-tions: 

severity (HB , ·) with labels {low = 0 .999 , medium = 0 .915 , high = 0 .026 }.

Aggregating the truth degrees across the previous rule set, and applying step-function profile γdiscard yields discard (X2; crisp ) = 0 . The framework safely avoids a false-positive discard. Instead, the presence of a verified single aesthetic anomaly ( HB ) with a safely bounded severity enables the self-repair policy. Given the latent state of HB , the cumulative label defect (HB , aesthetical ; ≤ medium ) evaluates to 

1.000 . Coupled with the Łukasiewicz negation of functional damages ( 1−0.023 = 0.977 ), we obtain: 

repair (X2, self ; f uzzy _level ) ← min(1 .000 , 0.977) = 0 .977 

Through γrepair , this yields repair (X2, self ; crisp ) = 1 .The neuro-symbolic pipeline leverages declarative geometric semantics to route each item to the most appropriate and cost-effective recovery procedure. The examples are handled correctly: the first is discarded by the system due to a recognized functional defect, while the second is self-repaired, as expected for scratch anomalies. The choice of t-norm and s-norm, however, strongly affects the final outcome. As an example, in Instance 1, the product or the Łukasiewicz t-norm would pre-vent the expected discard decision despite a clearly defective screw, as both de-grade the truth of a conjunction as its conditions grow, unlike min . Analogously, 18 Luca Ferragina, Ilenia Galati, Lorena Gullone, and Francesco Scarcello 

max retains only the strongest supporting rule, whereas additive s-norms may turn several weak signals into a strong conclusion, which is undesirable in this quality control scenario. The propagation by means of the γ function highlights a fundamental the-oretical advantage of our framework: the shift from continuous fuzzy reasoning to crisp operational decisions comes easily. Instead of relying on external pro-cedural scripts, ad-hoc defuzzification algorithms, or hardcoded post-processing rules, the binarization may be handled entirely within the logical semantics. Am-biguous neural outputs are gracefully absorbed by the continuous logic, naturally ending into deterministic boolean actions without ever breaking the end-to-end logical pipeline. 

# 5 Conclusion 

In this paper, we presented a case study of recently introduced qualitative fuzzy extension of Answer Set Programming, where predicates are equipped with finite linguistic labels and membership functions. The prototype leverages the struc-ture of this language to combine a machine learning-based component with a set of symbolic rules to detect and localize damages in images obtained from a production line of screws, and to provide decision-making pattern for damaged items. The illustrated examples reveal the capacity of our language to incorpo-rate the extremely effective, although potentially noisy, predictions of machine learning models with the rigor of symbolic reasoning into a formal, declarative pipeline. The association of data-driven membership functions with linguistic labels allows domain experts to encode their knowledge naturally, capturing the inherent vagueness of qualitative concepts without sacrificing logical power. Bibliography 

[1] Ágnes Achs and Attila Kiss. Fuzzy extension of datalog. Acta Cybern. ,12(2):153–166, 1995. [2] Mario Alviano and Rafael Peñaloza. Fuzzy answer sets approximations. 

Theory Pract. Log. Program. , 13(4-5):753–767, 2013. [3] Fabrizio Angiulli, Fabio Fassetti, Luca Ferragina, and Simona Nisticò. Explaining anomalies through semi-supervised autoencoders. Array ,28:100537, 2025. [4] Samy Badreddine, Artur S. d’Avila Garcez, Luciano Serafini, and Michael Spranger. Logic tensor networks. Artif. Intell. , 303:103649, 2022. [5] Paul Bergmann, Kilian Batzner, Michael Fauser, David Sattlegger, and Carsten Steger. The mvtec anomaly detection dataset: a comprehensive real-world dataset for unsupervised anomaly detection. International Jour-nal of Computer Vision , 129(4):1038–1059, 2021. [6] Marjon Blondeel, Steven Schockaert, Dirk Vermeir, and Martine De Cock. Fuzzy answer set programming: An introduction. In Ronald R. Yager, Ali M. Abbasov, Marek Z. Reformat, and Shahnaz N. Shahbazova, editors, Soft Computing: State of the Art Theory and Novel Applications , volume 291 of 

Studies in Fuzziness and Soft Computing , pages 209–222. Springer, 2013. [7] Fernando Bobillo and Umberto Straccia. fuzzydl: An expressive fuzzy de-scription logic reasoner. In 2008 IEEE International Conference on Fuzzy Systems (IEEE World Congress on Computational Intelligence) , pages 923– 930. IEEE, 2008. [8] Maria Eugenia Cornejo, David Lobo, and Jesús Medina. Syntax and seman-tics of multi-adjoint normal logic programming. Fuzzy Sets Syst. , 345:41–62, 2018. [9] Maria Eugenia Cornejo, David Lobo, and Jesús Medina. Extended multi-adjoint logic programming. Fuzzy Sets Syst. , 388:124–145, 2020. [10] Rafee Ebrahim. Fuzzy logic programming. Fuzzy Sets Syst. , 117(2):215–230, 2001. [11] Daan Huybrechs and Lloyd N Trefethen. Sigmoid functions, multiscale resolution of singularities, and hp-mesh refinement. Siam Review , 66(4):683– 693, 2024. [12] Jeroen Janssen, Steven Schockaert, Dirk Vermeir, and Martine De Cock. General fuzzy answer set programs. In International Workshop on Fuzzy Logic and Applications , pages 352–359. Springer, 2009. [13] Jeroen Janssen, Steven Schockaert, Dirk Vermeir, and Martine De Cock. A core language for fuzzy answer set programming. Int. J. Approx. Reason. ,53(4):660–692, 2012. [14] Matthias Lanzinger, Stefano Sferrazza, Przemyslaw Andrzej Walega, and Georg Gottlob. Fuzzy datalog ∃ over arbitrary t-norms. In Nikolaj S. Bjørner, Marijn Heule, and Andrei Voronkov, editors, LPAR 2024: Proceed-ings of 25th Conference on Logic for Programming, Artificial Intelligence 20 Luca Ferragina, Ilenia Galati, Lorena Gullone, and Francesco Scarcello 

and Reasoning, Port Louis, Mauritius, May 26-31, 2024 , volume 100 of 

EPiC Series in Computing , pages 426–444. EasyChair, 2024. [15] Van Hung Le, Fei Liu, and Dinh Khang Tran. Fuzzy linguistic logic pro-gramming and its applications. Theory Pract. Log. Program. , 9(3):309–341, 2009. [16] Yann Loyer and Umberto Straccia. The approximate well-founded semantics for logic programs with uncertainty. In Branislav Rovan and Peter Vojtás, editors, Mathematical Foundations of Computer Science 2003, 28th Inter-national Symposium, MFCS 2003, Bratislava, Slovakia, August 25-29, 2003, Proceedings , Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 541–550. Springer, 2003. [17] Yann Loyer and Umberto Straccia. Approximate well-founded semantics, query answering and generalized normal logic programs over lattices. Ann. Math. Artif. Intell. , 55(3-4):389–417, 2009. [18] Thomas Lukasiewicz and Umberto Straccia. Managing uncertainty and vagueness in description logics for the semantic web. Journal of Web Se-mantics , 6(4):291–308, 2008. [19] Robin Manhaeve, Sebastijan Dumancic, Angelika Kimmig, Thomas De-meester, and Luc De Raedt. Neural probabilistic logic programming in DeepProbLog. Artificial Intelligence , 298:103504, 2021. [20] Swarup Medasani, Jaeseok Kim, and Raghu Krishnapuram. An overview of membership function generation techniques for pattern recognition. Int. J. Approx. Reason. , 19(3-4):391–417, 1998. [21] Jesús Medina, Manuel Ojeda-Aciego, and Peter Vojtáš. A procedural se-mantics for multi-adjoint logic programming. In Portuguese Conference on Artificial Intelligence , pages 290–297. Springer, 2001. [22] Susana Nascimento, B Mirkin, and Fernando Moura-Pires. A fuzzy cluster-ing model of data and fuzzy c-means. In Ninth IEEE International Confer-ence on Fuzzy Systems. FUZZ-IEEE 2000 (Cat. No. 00CH37063) , volume 1, pages 302–307. IEEE, 2000. [23] Arseny Skryagin, Wolfgang Stammer, Daniel Ochs, Devendra Singh Dhami, and Kristian Kersting. Neural-probabilistic answer set programming. In Gabriele Kern-Isberner, Gerhard Lakemeyer, and Thomas Meyer, editors, 

Proceedings of the 19th International Conference on Principles of Knowl-edge Representation and Reasoning, KR 2022, Haifa, Israel, July 31 - Au-gust 5, 2022 , 2022. [24] Umberto Straccia. Reasoning within fuzzy description logics. Journal of artificial intelligence research , 14:137–166, 2001. [25] Maarten H. van Emden. Quantitative deduction and its fixpoint theory. J. Log. Program. , 3(1):37–53, 1986. [26] Davy Van Nieuwenborgh, Martine De Cock, and Dirk Vermeir. Fuzzy an-swer set programming. In Michael Fisher, Wiebe van der Hoek, Boris Konev, and Alexei Lisitsa, editors, Logics in Artificial Intelligence, 10th European Conference, JELIA , volume 4160 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science ,pages 359–372. Springer, 2006. FLASP: Answer Set Programming with Fuzzy Membership Functions 21 

[27] Peter Vojtás. Fuzzy logic programming. Fuzzy Sets Syst. , 124(3):361–370, 2001. [28] Zhun Yang, Adam Ishay, and Joohyung Lee. NeurASP: Embracing neural networks into answer set programming. In Christian Bessiere, editor, Pro-ceedings of the Twenty-Ninth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI 2020 , pages 1755–1762. ijcai.org, 2020.