Title: 2607.05680v1.pdf

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.05680v1

Published Time: Wed, 08 Jul 2026 00:16:13 GMT

Number of Pages: 22

Markdown Content:
Beyond Accuracy: How Humans Evaluate Legally Correct but Socially Controversial Legal 

# Advice from Machines 

# Benjamin Minhao Chen a Zhiyu Li b1 

> a

# Associate Professor, Faculty of Law, University of Hong Kong  

> b

# Associate Professor in Law and Policy, Durham Law School, Durham University 

# Abstract 

# AI systems are increasingly used to provide legal advice, raising questions about whether laypeople accept 

# guidance from algorithms —especially when that advice is legally correct but socially controversial. We report 

# a preregistered survey experiment with 3,348 adults in mainland China examining how people evaluate 

# identical legal advice when it is attributed either to an AI system or to a human lawyer, and when it is 

# accompanied by reasoning or not. 

# Contrary to expectations of algorithm aversion, attribution to an AI system has no net effect on perceived 

# reasonableness. However, mediation analyses reveal opposing psychological pathways underlying this null 

# result. AI -attributed advice is perceived as more objective, which increases perceived reasonableness, but also 

# as less comprehensive and less attentive to special circumstances, which decreases perceived reasona bleness. 

# By contrast, providing legal reasoning substantially increases perceived reasonableness regardless of source, 

# largely by enhancing perceptions of objectivity. Qualitative responses corroborate this tension between 

# objectivity and contextual sensitivity in evaluations of legal advice. 

# Together, these findings suggest that public responses to AI legal advisors are shaped not by rigid attitudes 

# toward automation, but by the balancing of competing normative expectations. The results have implications 

# for theories of algorithm aversion and the design of AI recommendation systems in normatively salient 

# domains. 

# Keywords: Algorithmic aversion, legal advice, attribution, reasoning, objectivity 

# Author Note: All authors have approved the submission and declare no conflicts of interest. The study 

# protocol was approved by the relevant institutional ethics committees, and all participants provided informed 

# consent before participation. This research was supported by the University of Hong Kong Lasting Impact 

# Fund.  

> 1

# Corresponding author. Durham University, Law School, PCL 176, The Palatine Centre, Stockton Rd., 

# Durham, UK. E -mail address: zhiyu.li@durham.ac.uk. 2

1 INTRODUCTION 

Artificial Intelligence (AI) systems are increasingly being designed to support and in some cases substitute for the opinion 

of trained experts. Among the various applications of generative AI, the dispensation of legal advice represents a use case 

that is important for the liberty and welfare of citizens. Everyone is assumed to know the law , and ignorance , as the saying 

goes, is no excuse. Yet the price of legal counsel, even for simple matters, can be exorbitant. Large Language Models 

(LLMs) and related technologies promise to make legal knowledge more accessible than ever before. By offering 

personalized information about rights, duties, and obligations, AI counsellors can assist individuals in planning their affai rs 

and resolving their disputes. These benefits, however, can only be fully realized if ordinary people are amenable to AI -

generated legal advice. Users may not act on legal information if they are not confident in the provider’s neutrality or 

competence . They may also seek a second opinion, thereby incurring duplicative costs. An exploration of the factors that 

influence how laypeople process legal advice from AI systems is thus critical and timely. 

We examine how ordinary people respond to AI systems as legal advisors. Although similar research questions have 

recently been broached by others (Hagan, 2024; Seabrooke, et al., 2024; Schneiders, et al., 2025) , this study makes two 

distinct contributions to our understanding of human -computer interaction in the legal domain. First, it probes how 

individuals assess the reasonableness of advice ascribed to an AI system when the information, though correct from a legal 

perspective, is in tension with popular morality. Second, this study investigates the variables that mediate how individuals 

assess such advice when it is said to come from an AI system rather than a qualified lawyer . An experiment conducted on 

3348 adults residing in the People’s Republic of China (PRC) finds that an explanation enhance d perceptions of the 

reasonableness of legal advice regardless of its provenance . Overall, attribution ha d no impact on how the advice itself is 

evaluated . Even so , the evidence suggests differences in how subjects evaluate d legal advice that wa s ascribed to a machine 

rather than a human . AI -attributed advice wa s more likely to be perceived as objective, thereby enhancing reasonab leness 

judgments. However, it wa s also less likely to be seen as having taken all circumstances into account and more likely to 

neglect uniqueness, thereby eroding reasonab leness judgments. These results imply a tension between objectivity on the 

one hand, and comprehensiveness of consideration and attention to un iqueness on the other. 

2 ALGORITHMIC ADVICE 

Originally invented to perform complex or tedious numerical operations, computers can now generate individualized 

recommendations for users in a variety of environments. How users re act to these suggestions has been the subject of 

extensive research spanning several d isciplines . The tendency to accept or incorporate machine advice is often referred to 

as “algorithm appreciation” (Logg, Minson, & Moore, 2019) or “automation bias” (Mosier, Skitka, Heers, & Burdick, 

1998) . The tendency to reject or ignore such recommendations, on the other hand, has been called “algorithm aversion” 

(Dietvorst, Simmons, & Massey, 2015) or “automation disuse ” or “ under -reliance” (Parasuraman & Riley, 1997) . While 

these labels appear synonymous , they do not have identical connotations. Here, we use “ algorithm aversion ” to refer to a

“biased assessment of an algorithm which manifests in negative behaviors and attitudes towards the algorithm compared 

to a human agent” (Jussupow, Benbasat, & Heinzl, 2020) . We limit our attention to algorithm aversion in the context of 

advice, suggestions, or recommendations, rather than decisions. 

The literature on algorithm aversion is characterized by heterogeneous and sometimes conflicting findings. One 

prominent account highlights the role of observed error . Indeed, t he term algorithm aversion originally described a 

phenomenon where people react more negatively to mistakes committed by an algorithm than by a human (Jussupow, 

Benbasat, & Heinzl, 2020; Prahl & Van Swol, 2017) . Th is penalty persists even when users witness algorithm ic forecasts 

outperform ing human ones , suggesting that it is machine imperfect ion rather than mere inaccuracy that produces aversion 3

(Dietvorst, Simmons, & Massey, 2015) . Further , a version has been linked to the desire for control and agency. Individuals 

are more willing to rely on algorithmic recommendations when they are able to modify them, even minimally (Dietvorst, 

Simmons, & Massey, 2018; Bohlen, Kruschel, Rosenberger, Zschech, & Kraus, 2025) .

More fundamentally , algorithm aversion may stem from visceral attitudes toward new technologies. Technological 

revolutions have sometimes been experienced as threats to established values and social order , thereby inducing societal -

level anxiety or “moral panic” (Cohen, 1972; Goode & Ben -Yehuda, 1994; Critcher, 2008) . AI systems might be viewed 

as unfamiliar and potentially dangerous agents whose behavior is “unknown” (Turel & Kalhan, 2023) . This primal 

prejudice can be reduced through learning and experience (Turel & Kalhan, 2023) . Overall, i mproving the perceived 

expertise of an automated assistant can turn algorithm aversion into appreciation (Hou & Jung, 2021; Daschner & 

Obermaier, 2022; de Jong, Bos, van Berkel, & Lamers, 2025) .

Algorithmic aver sion also depend s on the nature of the task being performed . Algorithms are trusted and relied on less 

for tasks that are seen as subjective rather than objective , especially those seen as requiring emotional rather than purely 

cognitive capacities (Castelo, Bos, & Lehmann, 2019) . This is partly because users draw on heuristics that portray machines 

as inflexible , impersonal, and unable to account for contextual details or special circumstances (Sundar, 2020) . In

healthcare, patients can be wary of automated diagnostics and treatment recommendations because of the absence of 

empathy (Riess & Kraft -Todd, 2014) or out of “a concern that AI providers are less able than human providers to account 

for their unique characteristics and circumstances” (Longoni, Bonezzi, & Morewedge, 2019) . People seem more averse 

towards algorithmic advice in moral as opposed to non -moral matters (Arlinghaus, Straßmann, & Dix, 2025) , although 

evidence for this claim is mixed (Liu & Wang, 2025) . Additionally , a lgorithmic aversion has been observed in regard to 

creative pursuits . The same musical soundtrack or artwork is often rated as less creative when it is presented as being AI 

generated rather than human generated (Magni, Park, & Chao, 2024; Heimstad, Wien, & Gaustad, 2025) . This form of 

“gatekeep[ing]” is driven by the perception that AI systems do not exert the effort and intentionality necessary for genuine 

creativity (Magni, Park, & Chao, 2024; Heimstad, Wien, & Gaustad, 2025) .

Because aversion often reflects doubts about reliability , flexibility , and transparency , explanation is often proposed as 

a means of addressing user resistance toward automated advice. Explanations may increase trust in , acceptance of , or 

willingness to use an algorithmic recommendation , particularly when they clarify its basis or enhance beliefs about its 

quality (Kizilcec, 2016; Kunkel, Donkers, Michael, Barbu, & Ziegler, 2019; Ning, Lu, Li, & Gupta, 2024; Shin, 2021) .

However, greater intelligibility does not always overcome the concern that AI systems lack the human -like affective 

capacities required for subjective tasks, or the sensitivity to personal and situational nuances thought necessary for tailored 

guidance (Castelo, Bos, & Lehmann, 2019; Longoni, Bonezzi, & Morewedge, 2019) .

3 THE LEGAL USE CASE 

The emergence of Large Language Models (LLMs) has made automated legal advice more feasible and naturalistic than 

ever before. A q ualitative study conducted in the United States reported significant public enthusiasm for using generative 

AI for legal assistance (Hagan, 2024) , and survey evidence from China similarly suggests that residents are positively 

disposed to ward AI -enabled legal services (Chen & Li, 2020) . Perhaps this is not entirely surprising since neutrality and 

consistency —attributes that humans tend to associate with machines —are basic tenets of legality . There are, however, 

features of legal reasoning that could give rise to hesitation or reservations about AI advisors. 

First, law is open textured. The notion of open texture is invoked by legal theorists to describe the inherent uncertainty 

of l aw (Waismann, 1945; Hart H. L., 1961) . A legal rule contains a core of determinacy and a penumbra of indeterminacy 

(Hart H. L., 1961) . For example, a rule banning vehicles from a park clearly pr ecludes the entry of a fully operational 4

passenger bus. Reasonable people can disagree, however, about whether the prohibition applies equally to baby tricycles 

or motorized wheelchairs. This indeterminacy is not a failure of drafting but an inevitable feature of language itself. 

Furthermore , u nlike mathematical concept s that have exact definitions, legal terms like “reasonable,” “due care,” and “fair” 

do not have precise boundaries and are contested through their application to unforeseen circumstances in the light of 

competing values. The practice of law therefore demand s sensitivity to the jurisprudential salience of novel facts and 

normative judgment. Interpreting and advising on law can involve subjectivity and creativity , making the task one that is 

liable to induce algorithm aversion .

Second, the law, as a system of hierarch ic al rules, can sometimes dictate results that contradict the moral values and 

principles of many citizens (Hart H. L., 1961) . Although jurists continue to debate whether legal validity can ever depend 

on moral criteria, it is generally accepted that the legally mandated outcome in a situation does not have to mirror the 

morally mandated outcome (Hart H. L., 1958; Raz, 1979; Dworkin, 1986) . This separation between law and morality raises 

the possibility of the same legal advi ce being evaluated more negatively if it is being rendered by an AI system rather than 

a human lawyer. A legal advisor that offers normatively questionable but professionally proper guidance may be perceived 

as being inaccurate , a belief that disproportionately impacts attitudes toward machines relative to humans. 

These considerations invite empirical investigation into whether laypeople are in fact less receptive to legal advice 

attributed to AI systems than to human advisors. An experiment conducted on lawyers and law students in the Czech 

Republic revealed a preference for human -crafted documents over AI -generated ones (Harasta, Novotná, & Savelka, 2024) .

Another e xperiment , fielded in Kenya , reported that citizens considered legal decisions based on AI -produced research to 

be as legitimate as legal decisions based on human -conducted research (Flanagan, Almeida, Chen, & Gitahi, 2025) . Perhaps 

the most germane to our present inquiry is a finding from the United Kingdom that ordinary people were more willing to 

act on machine -generated than human -generated legal advice (Seabrooke, et al., 2024) . Th at experiment did not hold the 

text of legal advice constant and participants might have preferred LLM s to lawyers because the ir responses display ed 

higher levels of complexity and confidence. More over , none of these studies explore whether and how the tension between 

law and morality shape s lay evaluations of AI -generated legal advice .

This article presents a large n experiment examining how ordinary Chinese residents assess the reasonableness of advice 

in cases where the legally correct answer is socially controversial. Reasonableness refers to a normative judgment about 

whether a piece of legal advice is sensible, justified, and appropriate given the relevant facts and social norms of a case. It 

is conceptually distinct from trust —“a willingness to be vulnerable” (Mayer, Davis, & Schoorman, 1995) , from 

credibility —the perceived expertness and trustworthiness of a source (Hovland, Janis, & Kelley, 1953) , and from 

fairness —appropriate impartiality in the treatment of parties (Cullity, 2008) . Unlike these source - or process -oriented 

constructs, reasonableness is a substantive evaluation of the advice itself rather than who gave it or how it was produced. 

Our study manipulated attribution rather than the substance or style of legal advice, and the advice given was always 

accurate as a matter of law . Research on algorithm aversion suggests that ascribing advice to an AI system might depress 

reasonableness ratings, particularly where users doubt an algorithm’s ability to account for context -specific factors. At the 

same time, because subjects were asked to evaluate the normative appeal of the advice rather than its legal soundness, they 

need not draw inferences from the source label at all. Formally, we test the following hypotheses. 

Hypothesis 1: Subjects judge legal advice to be as reasonable when it is attributed to an AI system as when it is attributed 

to a human. 

Hypothesis 2: Subjects judge legal advice to be more reasonable when it is accompanied by an explanation than when 

it is not .5

Hypothesis 3: To the extent that participants judge legal advice to be less reasonable if it is attributed to an AI system 

rather than a human , this difference should be greater when the advice is not accompanied by an explanation .

To clarify the mechanisms that may underlie any effects of attribution and explanation, we also examine four candidate 

mediators. The first mediator, referred to as “mistake, ” captures perceptions of an advisor ’s competence and reliability. 

Prahl and Van Swol (2017) observe that people discount algorithmic forecasts more sharply than human forecasts after 

observing a single instance of poor performance, and Daschner and Obermaier (2022) conclude that beliefs abou t accuracy 

strongly predict trust in algorithmic recommendations. The second mediator, “objectivity, ” captures the perception of an 

advisor as impartial and free from subjective influences. Yalcin et al. (2022) find that machines are often seen as more 

objective and less emotionally biased than humans, and that this impression positively influences evalua tions of algorithmic 

recommendations. 

The third mediator, “attention to special circumstances, ” captures the perception that an advisor may have failed to 

recognize the features that make a case normatively different from otherwise like cases. Longoni, Bonezzi, and Morewedge 

(2019) demonstrate that resistance to AI guidance in medical contexts is dr iven by uniqueness neglect —the belief that an 

algorithm cannot adequately account for anomalous or atypical features of a case. Flanagan et al. (2025) similarly 

conjecture that doubts about acting on AI -generated legal analysis may stem from perceptions of AI decision -making as 

insufficiently responsive to contextual variation. The fourth mediator, “comprehensiveness, ” captures the perception that 

an advisor may have missed relevant elements of a case, even if the case is not idiosyncratic. It is conceptually related to 

but distinct from attention to special circumstances: where the latter concerns sensitivity to features that make a case 

normatively atypical, comprehensiveness concerns the thoroughness of factual processing in ordinary cases. 

Together, these mediators relate to two broad psychological dimensions that prior research has shown to shape 

evaluations of algorithmic versus human advice: the perceived capability of the advisor and the degree of personalization 

the task demands (Qin, et al., 2025) . Analysis of these potential mediators illuminates the normative expectations that 

subjects have of legal advice and how these expectations color their attitudes toward artificial lawyers. Attribution and 

reasoning may shape reasonableness judgments by changing participants’ perceptions of the advice or advisor. Attribution 

to AI may increase perceived objectivity if participants associate machines with neutrality, but may also increase the 

perceived likelihood of mistake and reduce perceived comprehensiveness or attention to special circumstances if 

participants view AI systems as less sensitive to contextual nuance. Reasoning may reduce perceived mistake and increase 

perceived comprehensiveness, objectivity, and attention to special circumstances by making the legal basis for the advice 

more explicit. In turn, perceived mistake should make advice appear less reasonable, whereas perceived 

comprehensiveness, objectivity, and attention to special circumstances should make advice appear more reasonable. 

4 SCENARIO SELECTION SURVEYS 

We started by conducting survey s in Mandarin Chinese to measure the controversiality of legally mandated outcome s in 

several legal cases. The purpose of the se survey s is to select suitably controversial scenarios for the main experiment 

testing the effect of attribution on lay evaluations of the reasonab leness of legal advice. 6

4.1 Method 

4.1.1 Des ign 

In the first survey, e ach participant encountered four legal cases : one about an offending motorist’s refusal to sign a traffic 

accident report , one about the return of a betrothal gift after a short marriage , one about an agreement between sons about 

filial support , and one about the death of a non -paying passenger in an accident . In the second survey, each participant 

encountered two legal cases : one about the right of a child born outside marriage to an equal division of an estate and one 

about tortfeasor’s liability for a victim’s pre -existing medical condition. 

For each of these items, participants read a stylized account of the facts . Participants were then asked which one of two 

binary outcomes were, in their opinion, more reasonable. They were also asked to indicate their levels of confidence in 

their judgments on a 5 -point scale. Participants did not receive any information about legal rules or principles. Cases were 

presented in the same order to all participants. 

The facts of all six cases are reproduced in Figure 1. For example, in the first case of the first survey, participants read 

about a traffic accident between two motorists . Briefly, on February 1, 2023, Yu caused a traffic accident by running a red 

light and colliding with Xiao’s van. He was found to be fully at fault. The official repair cost was set at 12,300 yuan. 

However, Yu refused to sign the accident and damage repor ts, and subsequent negotiations to resolve the matter were 

unsuccessful. Participants were asked whether they thought it was more reasonable for Xiao to be awarded or not awarded 

12,300 yuan in compensation despite the absen ce of He’s signature on the reports .7

Figure 1: Facts of six legal cases received by participants and the binary outcomes from which the participants were asked to choose .

Outcomes are marked with an asterisk (*) represents the legally mandated outcomes of the legal cases .8

4.1.2 Participants 

The first survey was administered online to 210 adults residing in the PRC mainland between 4 and 14 April 2024. 

Participants were recruited by a professional survey company, Wei Diao Cha, and quota sampled to approximate the 

Chinese internet population fo r age and gender. 106 participants identified as female and 104 as male. Omitting two entries 

containing typographical errors in birth dates or extreme values, 19.7% of participants reported themselves as being in the 

20 to 29 age range, 24.5% in the 30 to 39 age range, 20.2% in the 40 to 49 age range, 23.6% in the 50 to 59 age range, and 

12.0% in the 60 to 79 age range. 64.8% of participants reported living in an urban area and 35.2% in a rural area. 

The second survey was administered online to 201 adults residing in the PRC mainland between 29 May and 11 June 

2024. Participants were recruited by Wei Diao Cha and quota sampled to approximate the Chinese internet population for 

age and gender. Participa nts in the first survey were excluded from taking part in the second survey. 95 participants 

identified as female and 106 as male. Omitting two entries containing typographical errors in birth dates, 16.1% of 

participants reported themselves as being in th e 20 to 29 age range, 23.6% in the 30 to 39 age range, 20.6% in the 40 to 49 

age range, 24.1% in the 50 to 59 age range, and 15.6% in the 60 to 79 age range. 70.1% of participants reported living in 

an urban area and 29.9% in a rural area. 

4.2 Results 

The results of the two survey s are summarized in Figure 2. For the first survey, (1) the traffic accident report case split 

respondents 84.3% to 15.7%, the majority believing an award of damages to the innocent motorist be more reasonable; (2) 

the betrothal gift case split respondents 66.7% to 33.3%, the majority believing the return of the gift to the estranged 

husband to be more reasonable; (3) the filial support case split respondents 79.0% to 21.0%, the majority believing the 

mother’s entitlement to contribution from her younger son to be more reasonable; and (4) the pre -existing condition case 

split respondents 77.1% to 22.9%, the majority believing the reduction of liability for the driver to be more reasonable . For 

the second survey, (5) the estate division case split respondents 60.7% to 39.3%, the majority believing a non -equal share 

for the child born outside marriage to be more reasonable; and (6) the pre -existing medical condition case split respondents 

60.2% to 39.8%, the majority believing the non -reduction of liability for the driver to be more reasonable. 9 

> Figure 2: Distribution of participant confidence when making reasonableness judgments that contradict legal requirements across three
> case scenarios.

Of the six cases tested, th ree produced approximately 60 -40 splits in opinion: the betrothal gift case, the estate division 

case and the pre -existing medical condition case. In the estate division ca se, a majority of participants judged what 

happened to be the legally mandated outcome on the facts to be less reasonable than the opposing alternative. In the 

betrothal gift case and pre -existing medical condition case, a majority of participants judge d what happened to be the 

legally mandated outcome s on the facts to be more reasonable than the opposing alternative s.

5 MAIN EXPERIMENT 

The main experiment administered in Mandarin Chinese tests whether ordinary people rate the reasonableness of accurate 

but socially controversial legal advice differently if it is said to be generated by an AI system rather than a human lawyer. 

Hypotheses, participant exclusion criteria, and statistical analyses were preregistered on the Open Science Framework. 

5.1 Method 

5.1.1 Data Availability Statement 

Deidentified data, survey materials, and analysis code will be made available on OSF. The OSF preregistration is available 

at  https://osf.io/gx9pa/overview .

5.1.2 Ethical Approval and AI Use Statement 

This study was approved by the Ethical Review Board s of the University of Hong Kong (EA230601 ) and Durham 

University (LAW -2024 -06 -30T16_33_13 -kszf79). All participants provided informed consent prior to participation and 

were free to withdraw at any time. We used Codex and Claude.ai to replicate all analyses reported in this article and to 

proofread the final manuscript .

5.1.3 Design 

The main experiment features a 2 ×2 factorial between -subjects design. The first factor is attribution of the legal advice: AI 

system or human lawyer. The second factor is the reasoning given in the legal advice: reasoning or no reasoning. 

Participants are randomly sorted to one of three scenarios: the betrothal gift scenario, the estate division scenario, and the 

pre -existing medical condition scenario. For each scenario, p articipants read the facts of the case and legal advice ascribed 

to either an AI system or a human lawyer. The legal advice may contain reasoning based on relevant laws and regulations 

or it may contain no reasoning at all. The legal advice presented to participants is constant across the attribution factor :

specifically, p articipants assigned to the AI system, no reasoning condition and participants assigned to the human lawyer, 

no reasoning condition receive d identical legal advice. Participants assigned to the AI system, reasoning condition and 

participants assigned to the human lawyer, reasoning condition also receive d identical legal advice. In both the reasoning 

and no reasoning conditions, the legal advice wa s accurate, that is, the conclusion reached wa s correct under existing law. 

For example, participants assigned to the estate division case were informed that the opinion of Lawyer Li or the AI legal 

service platform was that the child born outside marriage was entitled to an equal share of the inheritance . Figure 3 shows 

variations of the vignette for the estate division case. 10  

> Figure 3: Vignettes with Human and AI Attributors and Reasoning Conditions of the Estate Division Case

After reading the scenario, participants were posed two comprehension check questions. The comprehension check 

questions related to the facts of the case and not the legal advice given. Participants were then asked to judge the 

reasonableness of the legal advice given on a 1 to 7 scale and to provide a short justification for their answers . The 

reasonableness rating is the outcome measure of interest. They were also asked to indicate , on a 1 to 7 scale, (1) how likely 

they thought the human lawyer or AI system would make analytical errors when providing legal advice, (2) how likely 

they thought the human lawyer or AI system would take all the factual elements in the case into consideration when 

providing legal advice, (3) how likely they thought the legal advice provided by the human lawyer or AI system was 

objective, and (4) to what extent they thought the human lawyer or AI system took into account special circumstances that 

may exist in the case when providing legal advice. These measures are candidate mediators of the outcome measure. 

Finally, participants were administered a short multiple -choice quiz comprising six questions about basic legal facts. 

This quiz measures participants’ level of legal knowledge. Demographic information on age, gender, education, and other 

data relating to experience in using AI legal software and perceptions of the reliability of AI legal software were also 

collected. 11 

5.1.4 Participants 

The main experiment survey was administered online to 5 ,040 adults residing in the PRC mainland between 10 August 

and 12 December 2024. Participants were recruited by Wei Diao Cha and quota sampled to approximate the Chinese 

internet population for age and gender. Excluding participants who failed the comprehen sion checks leaves a sample of 

3,348 participants. Of these participants, 1712 (51.1%) identified as male, 1633 (48.8%) as female, and 3 (0.1%) as other. 

Omitting 17 entries containing non -numeric birth dates and 24 entries containing impossible or extreme age values, 32.0% 

of participant s reported themselves as being in the 20 to 29 age range, 33.7% in the 30 to 39 age range, 21.5% in the 40 to 

49 age range, 9.5% in the 50 to 59 age range, and 3.3% in the 60 to 79 age range. 39.9% of participants stated that they 

had education at or below the level of a three -year undergraduate degree, 52.8% stated they had education at the level of a 

four -year undergraduate degree, 6.8% stated they had education at the level of a master's degree, and 0.5% stated they had 

education at the level of a doctor al degree. 7.2% of participants claimed a major in law or legal studies; the remainder did 

not. 

Descriptive statistics and pairwise correlations for quantitative variables are reported in Table 1. 

Table 1. Descriptive Statistics and Correlations for Quantitative Variables                                                             

> Variable NMSD 1234567
> 1. Age 3,307 36.27 11.07 —
> 2. Legal knowledge 3,348 4.65 1.19 0.03 —
> 3. Reasonableness 3,348 5.11 1.38 0.07 0.03 —
> 4. Mistake 3,348 3.32 1.52 0.04 -0.12 -0.17 —
> 5. Comprehensiveness 3,348 4.81 1.34 0.08 -0.01 0.44 -0.10 —
> 6. Objectivity 3,348 5.06 1.26 0.08 0.10 0.55 -0.12 0.47 —
> 7. Attention to Special Circumstances 3,348 4.31 1.51 0.10 -0.05 0.38 0.02 0.52 0.35 —

Note. Values below the diagonal are Pearson correlations computed using pairwise complete observations. Age 

descriptives and age correlations use valid ages only : missing , non -numeric , impossible , or extreme values have been 

excluded .

5.2 Data Analysis 

5.2.1 Main Effect of Attribution 

To analyze the effect of attribution on reasonableness judgments in each of the scenarios, we estimate a linear regression 

model that has reasonableness ratings as the dependent variable and an indicator variable for an AI system attribution as 

the in dependent variable and compute HC2 robust standard errors. The estimated coefficient for the indicator variable can 

be interpreted as the average treatment effect (ATE) in a Neyman -Rubins framework (Imbens & Rubin, 2015) . The 

accompanying standard errors are equivalent to the conservative Neyman standard errors in this framework (Imbens & 

Rubin, 2015) . Cohen’s d was computed by dividing each average treatment effect by the pooled standard deviation of 

reasonableness ratings in the corresponding two -group comparison. 

For the betrothal gift scenario, the average reasonableness rating for participants in the human lawyer condition is 5.166 

(SE = 0.056). Attribution of legal advice to an AI system has an ATE of -0.064 (SE = 0.074, p = 0.389, d = -0.05). For the 

estate div ision scenario, the average reasonableness rating for participants in the human lawyer condition is 4.644 (SE = 

0.074). Attribution of legal advice to an AI system has an ATE of 0.044 (SE = 0.103, p = 0.665, d = 0.03). For the pre -

existing medical conditio n scenario, the average reasonableness rating for participants in the human lawyer condition is 

5.368 (SE = 0.052). Attribution of legal advice to an AI system has an ATE of 0.039 (SE = 0.072, p = 0.589, d = 0.03). 

Pooling across all scenarios, the average reasonableness rating for participants in the human lawyer condition is 5.104 (SE 12 

= 0.035). Attribution of legal advice to an AI system has an ATE of 0.012 (SE = 0.048, p = 0.801, d = 0.01). Figure 4 

presents the effect of attribution condition on reasonableness ratings across the three legal scenarios.        

> Figure 4:Effect of attribution condition on reasonableness ratings by legal scenario. Source attribution had no detectable effect on
> average reasonableness ratings for all three scenarios.

Overall , there is no evidence that attribution of legal advice to an AI system rather than a human lawyer ha d an effect 

on reasonableness ratings. 

5.2.2 Main Effect of Reasoning 

To analyze the effect of reasoning on reasonableness judgments in each of the scenarios, we estimate a linear regression 

model that has reasonableness ratings as the dependent variable and an indicator variable for reasoning as the independent 

variable and compute HC2 robust standard errors. For the betrothal gift scenario, the average reasonableness rating for 

participants in the no reasoning condition is 4.955 (SE = 0.055). Addition of reasoning has an ATE of 0.347 (SE = 0.073, 

p = 0.000, d = 0.29). For t he estate division scenario, the average reasonableness rating for participants in the no reasoning 

condition is 4.416 (SE = 0.073). Addition of reasoning has an ATE of 0.519 (SE = 0.101, p = 0.000, d = 0.34). For the pre -

existing medical condition scenari o, the average reasonableness rating for participants in the no reasoning condition is 

5.371 (SE = 0.048). Addition of reasoning has an ATE of 0.034 (SE = 0.072, p = 0.637, d = 0.03). Pooling across all 

scenarios, the average reasonableness rating for part icipants in the no reasoning condition is 4.974 (SE = 0.034). Addition 

of reasoning has an ATE of 0.274 (SE = 0.048, p = 0.000, d = 0.20). Figure 5 presents the effect of the reasoning condition 

on reasonableness ratings across the three scenarios. 

Overall, there is evidence that addition of reasoning had a positive effect on reasonableness ratings. 13            

> Figure 5:Effect of reasoning condition on reasonableness ratings by legal scenario. Providing reasoning significantly enhanced average
> reasonableness ratings for two of three scenarios, the largest effect being observed in the estate division case.

5.2.3 Interaction Effect Between Attribution and Reasoning 

To analyze the interaction between attribution and reasoning on reasonableness judgments in each of the scenarios, we 

estimate a linear regression model that has reasonableness ratings as the dependent variable. The in dependent variables are 

an indicator variable for an AI system attribution , an indicator variable for reasoning, and an interaction term between the 

two indicator variables. HC2 robust standard errors are computed. The estimated coefficient for the indicator variables can 

be interpreted as the causal average treatment effect (CA TEs) in a Neyman -Rubins causal framework (Lu, 2016) .

For the betrothal gift scenario, the average reasonableness rating for participants in the human lawyer, no reasoning 

condition is 4.933 (SE = 0.084). Compared to this reference group, attribution of legal advice to an AI system has an ATE 

of 0.043 (SE = 0 .111, p = 0.700) and addition of reasoning has an ATE of 0.458 (SE = 0.110, p = 0.000). Attribution of 

legal advice to an AI system and addition of reasoning has an ATE of -0.209 (SE = 0.147, p = 0.155) over and above the 

main effects. 

For the estate division scenario, the average reasonableness rating for participants in the human lawyer, no reasoning 

condition is 4.388 (SE = 0.108). Compared to this reference group, attribution of legal advice to an AI system has an ATE 

of 0.057 (SE = 0.147, p = 0.700) and addition of reasoning has an ATE of 0.523 (SE = 0.146, p = 0.000). Attribution of 

legal advice to an AI system and addition of reasoning has an ATE of -0.005 (SE = 0.202, p = 0.979) over and above the 

main effects. 

For the pre -existing medical condition scenario, the average reasonableness rating for participants in the human lawyer, 

no reasoning condition is 5.393 (SE = 0.069). Compared to this reference group, attribution of legal advice to an AI system 

has an ATE of -0.049 (SE = 0.096, p = 0.605) and addition of reasoning has an ATE of -0.056 (SE = 0.105, p = 0.596). 

Attribution of legal advice to an AI system and addition of reasoning has an ATE of 0.172 (SE = 0.144, p = 0.230) over 

and above the main effects. 

Pooling across all scenarios, the average reasonableness rating for participants in the human lawyer, no reasoning 

condition is 4.982 (SE = 0.051). Compared to this reference group, attribution of legal advice to an AI system has an ATE 

of -0.017 (SE = 0.0 69, p = 0.804) and addition of reasoning has an ATE of 0.252 (SE = 0.070, p = 0.000). Attribution of 14 

legal advice to an AI system and addition of reasoning has an ATE of 0.043 (SE = 0.095, p = 0.650) over and above the 

main effects. 

Overall, there is no evidence of an interaction effect between attribution of legal advice to an AI system rather than a 

human lawyer and addition of reasoning . Figure 6 presents the interaction between attribution and reasoning conditions 

across the three legal scenarios.   

> Figure 6:Interaction between attribution and reasoning conditions on reasonableness ratings by legal scenario. There is no significant
> interaction between source attribution and the provision of reasoning in any of the three scenarios.

5.2.4 Moderation by Legal Knowledge 

The legal knowledge quiz consisted of six questions. 9 or 0.3% of participants received a score of zero on the quiz, 1.3% 

received a score of one, 3.6% received a score of two, 10.6% received a score of three, 24.9% received a score of four, 

31.6% received a score of five, and 27.9% received a score of six. The median score is five. As pre -registered, participants 

are coded as having high legal knowledge if they scored above the median and as having low legal knowledge if they 

scored at or below the median. To analyze heterogeneity in treatment effects by legal knowledge, we re -estimate the linear 

regression models above, introducing an additional indicator variable for high legal knowledge and interaction term or 

terms between this indicator variable and th e other dependent variables. Regression results are presented in Table 2. 15                                      

> Variable sModel 1 Model 2Model 3
> (Intercept) 5.073 ***
> (0.043)
> 4.947 ***
> (0.041)
> 4.969 ***
> (0.061)
> Agent (AI = 1) 0.012
> (0.058)
> —-0.044
> (0.082)
> Reasoning (Present = 1) —0.271 ***
> (0.057)
> 0.221 **
> (0.085)
> Legal Knowledge (High = 1) 0.108
> (0.074)
> 0.100
> (0.074)
> 0.048
> (0.108)
> Agent × Legal Knowledge 0.005
> (0.103)
> —0.104
> (0.148)
> Reasoning × Legal Knowledge —0.002
> (0.102)
> 0.096
> (0.148)
> Agent × Reasoning ——0.097
> (0.115)
> Agent × Reasoning × Legal Knowledge ——-0.185
> (0.204)
> N3,348 3,348 3,348
> R² / Adjusted R² 0.001 / 0.000 0.011 / 0.010 0.011 / 0.009
> F-statistic 1.566 12.37 *** 5.537 ***
> *p< 0.05, ** p< 0.01, *** p< 0.001
> Table 2. Treatment Effects on Reasonableness Ratings by Legal Knowledge

Overall, there is no evidence that legal knowledge moderates the main effect of attribution on reasonableness ratings, 

the main effect of reasoning on reasonableness ratings, or the interaction effect between attribution and reasoning .

5.2.5 Mediation Analysis 

Mediation analyses were conducted using a path -analytic approach following (Hayes, 2013) , estimated via structural 

equation modelling (Rosseel, 2012) .2 Each model included all four candidate mediators simultaneously, with covariate 

adjustments for age, gender, level of education, study of law -related fields, and legal knowledge. Point estimates and 95% 

bias -corrected bootstrap confidence intervals are ba sed on 5,000 bootstrap samples. Indirect effects whose confidence 

intervals exclude zero are considered statistically significant. The causal interpretation of mediation analysis relies on th e

assumption of no unmeasured confounding of the mediator -outcome relationship, which cannot be fully guaranteed in the 

absence of experimental manipulation of the mediators (Spencer, Zanna, & Fong, 2005; VanderWeele, 2015) .

For the mediation analyses, participants with missing or non -numeric birth years and participants with impossible or 

extreme age values were excluded before estimating the models, leaving 3,307 observations. 

The results of the mediation analysis for the effect of attribution on reasonableness ratings are presented in Table 3. 

The total effect in the covariate -adjusted mediation model is 0.009. The indirect effect through mistake is -0.018 with a  

> 2

Note that the preregistration specified that mediation analysis would be conducted following the framework of Imai, 

Keele, and Yamamoto (2010). The present approach, taken at the request of the journal, estimates all mediators 

simultaneously in a single structural equation model . The results are qualitatively similar across both methods. 16 

95% CI of [ -0.032, -0.007]. The indirect effect through comprehensiveness is -0.057 with a 95% CI of [ -0.080, -0.038]. 

The indirect effect through objectivity is 0.049 with a 95% CI of [0.011, 0.088]. The indirect effect through attention to 

special circum stances is -0.061 with a 95% CI of [ -0.085, -0.043]. Attribution to an AI system therefore decreased 

reasonableness ratings through diminished perceptions of attention to special circumstances and comprehensiveness, and 

enhanced perceptions of mistake. The se negative indirect effects were partially offset by an enhanced perception of 

objectivity, which increased reasonableness ratings. 

> Table 3. Estimated Indirect Effects for the Effect of Attribution on Reasonableness Ratings

The results of the mediation analysis for the effect of reasoning on reasonableness ratings are presented in Table 4. The 

total effect in the covariate -adjusted mediation model is 0.284. The indirect effect through mistake is 0.014 with a 95% CI 

of [0.003, 0.027]. The indirect effect through comprehensiveness is 0.019 with a 95% CI of [0.006, 0.036]. The indirect 

effect through objectivity is 0.085 with a 95% CI of [0.047, 0.124]. The indirect effect through attention to special 

circumstances is -0.004 with a 95% CI of [ -0.019, 0.011]. It seems therefore that 30.0% of the total effect of reasoning on 

reasonableness ratings can be explained by enhanced perceptions of objectivity, 6.8% by enhanced perceptions of 

comprehensiveness, and 5.0% by diminished percep tions of mistake.                               

> Table 4. Estimated Indirect Effects for the Effect of Reasoning on Reasonableness Ratings
> The component paths clarify how the indirect effects arise. In the attribution model, AI attribution increased perceived mist ake and
> objectivity, but decreased perceived comprehensiveness and attention to special circumstances. In the reasoning model, providing
> reasoning decreased perceived mistake and increased perceived comprehensiveness and objectivity, but did not significantly af fect
> attention to special circumstances. Across both models, perceived mistake negatively predicted reasonableness ratings, whereas perceived
> comprehensiveness, objectivity, and attention to special circumstances positively predicted reasonableness ratings.
> Estimate 95% CI Lower Bound 95% CI Higher Bound
> Mistake -0.018 -0.032 -0.007
> Comprehensiveness -0.057 -0.080 -0.038
> Objectivity 0.049 0.011 0.088
> Attention to Special Circumstances -0.061 -0.085 -0.043
> Estimate 95% CI Lower Bound 95% CI Higher Bound
> Mistake 0.014 0.003 0.027
> Comprehensiveness 0.019 0.006 0.036
> Objectivity 0.085 0.047 0.124
> Attention to Special Circumstances -0.004 -0.019 0.011

17 

6 DISCUSSION 

In general, there is no evidence that attribution of advice to an AI -system adversely colored how participants judged the 

reasonableness of a legal opinion . At the same time, the data suggests that there are cancelling effects. Attribution of legal 

advice to AI seemed to reduce reasonableness ratings by influencing perceptions of attention to special circumstances, 

comprehensiveness and perhaps mistake. It also seemed to increase reasonableness ratings by influencing perceptions of 

objectivity. 

The se patterns are corroborated by participants’ justification s for their reasonableness ratings. First, a number of 

participants brought up the apparent objectivity of the AI system , noting its use of “intelligent algorithms,” “massive 

calculations of statistics,” and “big data analysis”. One participant emphasized the capacity of machines to “ judge the entire 

matter without any personal emotions.” This sentiment was shared by another respondent who wrote that “[the AI system] 

was able to correctly and rationally view the case without individuals’ emotional coloring,” which “ allowed the case to be 

handled more fairly and reasonably.” Others also asserted immunity to “subjective factors” to be an ad vantage of AI 

systems in the provision of legal advice .

However, objectivity was also characterized by some participants as a limitation of AI systems . One participant argued 

that the emotional detachment of machines compromised comprehensiveness , noting that “in real life, many things involve 

human feelings ” and that “[the computer ] could not accurately analyze all aspects of this matter.” Others contended that 

the AI system failed to “combine with actual circumstances,” to “consider realistic situations,” or analyze based on “the 

event itself .” A participant assigned to the estate division scenario thought the legal advice given to be unreasonable 

because “AI only considered the legal provisions granting inheritance rights to children born within and outside marriage, 

but did not take into account how much of the estate in Xu’s family was derived from Xu himself. ” By comparison, several 

participants who received the same legal advice from a human lawyer praised her opinion as “targeted” and 

“comprehensive .”

The quantitative and qualitative results raise the possibility of an empirical opposition between objectivity and 

comprehensiveness in the legal domain. While perceived objectivity may convince users to accept automated legal 

recommendations , it can also arouse suspicion s about whether the machine has truly taken all the factual circumstances 

into account . As discussed earlier, law is by its very nature not a set of rigid formulas. Rules and principles do not by 

themselves resolve all disputes and the open texture of law means that the application of legal norms often calls for social 

and moral judgment . A purely objective approach, based on “intelligent algorithms ” and “big data analysis” may struggle 

to capture the unique, messy details of human experience —the grasp of “special circumstances ” and “realistic situations ”

that some participants found missing from legal advice attributed to an AI -system . This tension should be considered when 

designing and implementing AI legal advisors. 

More generally , this article affirms algorithm aversion as a dynamic rather than static phenomenon. Identifying the 

causal pathways that shape our attitudes towards automation is important, even when those channels partially or fully offset 

one another. This is because changes in technological capabilities or public narratives can alter the magnitude of these 

pathways and thereby impact how we engage and interact with intelligent machines. Moreover, how we respond to artificial 

advice sometimes depends on the standards o r values governing the relevant domain of human activity. Our expectations 

of legal counsel, for example, differ in degree if not kind from our expectations of recommendations for movies or jokes. 

These normative understandings may evolve over time, shifti ng our disposition towards algorithmic guidance on a 

particular problem or topic. 18 

7 LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE RESEARCH 

There are several limitations of our study that point toward valuable avenues for future research. First, our experiment was 

based on a pre -tested set of socially controversial cases drawn from Chinese civil law and was fielded in the PRC mainland .

Comparative studies could explore how cultural dimensions, such as individualism -collectivism (Barnes, Zhang, & 

Valenzuela, 2024) or trust in institutions (Castelo, 2024) , moderate attitudes towards AI -generated legal advice. 

Second , the experiment presented here did not manipulate the presentation or embodiment of the AI system to users. 

The automated advisor was described generically as an “AI legal service platform. ” Extension could investigate whether 

anthropomorphic design elements (e.g., a conversational avatar, a name, or a more transparent explanation of the 

underlying model) influence perceptions of mistake, comprehensiveness, objectivity, and attention to special 

circumstances. 

Third , our experiment measures the immediate response of ordinary people to vignettes about automated legal advisors 

and does not address long -term user behavior or the impact of repeated interactions on user attitudes. In addition, the 

outcome variable is self -reported and may be subject to cognitive biases such as social desirability (Almog, 2025) . Though 

logistically difficult and costly to execute, longitudinal field studies can uncover how human trust and reliance on AI legal 

advisors evolve with continued use and experience. 

Fourth, the candidate mediators were measured with single items. These items capture theoretically relevant 

perceptions, but they cannot capture all dimensions of the broader constructs to which those perceptions are connected. 

Attention to special circums tances, for instance, is closely connected to uniqueness neglect, or the concern that AI systems 

may fail to account for the distinctive features of individual cases (Longoni, Bonezzi, & Morewedge, 2019) , as well as to 

the negative machine heuristic that portrays AI systems as rigid and contextually insensitive (Sundar, 2020) .

Comprehensiveness, the extent to which an advisor is seen to have considered all relevant elements of a case, may also 

overlap with notions such as diligence and analytical depth. Because these mediator measures were collected after 

participants saw the source label, they may reflect both participants’ evaluations of the specific advice or advisor in context 

and broader attitudes toward AI systems that the source label brings to mind (Molina & Sundar, 2022) . Validated multi -

item instruments would permit a more rigorous psychometric assessment of these constructs. 

Fifth , our mediation analysis suggests that the positive effect of providing reasoning on judgments of reasonableness is 

driven in significant part by enhanced perceptions of objectivity. This finding provokes a broader question : is the statistical 

relationship between reasoning and objectivity a general phenomenon or one specific to the legal domain ? The importance 

of objectivity in the application studied here could be explained by t he intimate association between neutrality and 

impartiality on the one hand and law on the other . In fields such as creative design or medical diagnosis, reasoning might 

operate to enhance perceptions of originality or empathy instead of, or in addition to, objectivity. There are therefore 

grounds to question whether reasoning activates the same psychological mechanisms in all spheres .

8 CONCLUSION 

An experiment conducted on 3 ,348 residents in the mainland PRC finds no evidence of ordinary people exhibit ing bias 

against AI -generated legal advice, even when that advice is socially controversial but legally correct. The source of the 

advice —whether attributed to an AI system or a human lawyer —had no significant effect on participants’ perceptions of 

its reasonableness. There is, however, some indication of a more intricate underlying mechanism: attribution to an AI 

simultaneously enhance d perceptions of objectivity, increasing perceived reasonableness, and diminishe d perceptions of 

comprehensiveness and attention to special circumstances, decreasing perceived reasonableness. A qualitative examination 

of open -ended responses by participants also hints at a tension between objectivity and comprehensiveness in the legal 19 

field : the perceived objectivity that makes AI -generated advice convincing may also give rise to skepticism about its ability 

to grasp the fluid and circumstantial nature of human disputes. Importantly , the provision of reasoning significantly 

enhanced the perceived reasonableness of advice , principally , it seems , by altering perceptions of objectivity. This result 

implies that the explanation behind a legal opinion may be more critical to user acceptance than the human or algorithmic 

origin of the advice . Advancing these insights permits us to better design user interfaces and thereby optimize the benefits 

of technology not only for access to justice but also in other normatively salient domains .

AUTHOR NOTE 

All data generated or analyzed during this study are provided in the tables and figures and have not been previously 

published or used. 

REFERENCES 

Almog, D. (2025, 4 26). AI recommendations and non -instrumental image concerns. Retrieved from arXiv: 

https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2504.19047 

Arlinghaus, C. S., Straßmann, C., & Dix, A. (2025).  Increased morality through social communication or decision situation 

worsens the acceptance of robo -advisors. Computers in Human Behavior: Artificial Humans .

Barnes, A. J., Zhang, Y., & Valenzuela, A. (2024). AI and culture: Culturally dependent responses to AI systems.  Current 

Opinion in Psychology .

Bohlen, L., Kruschel, S., Rosenberger, J., Zschech, P., & Kraus, M. (2025, 8 5).  Overcoming algorithm aversion with 

transparency: Can transparent predictions change user behavior? Retrieved from arXiv: 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.03168 

Castelo, N. (2024). Perceived corruption reduces algorithm aversion. Journal of Consumer Psychology .

Castelo, N., Bos, M. W., & Lehmann, D. R. (2019). Task -dependent algorithm aversion. Journal of Marketing Research ,

809 -825. 

Chen, B. M., & Li, Z. (2020). How Will Technology Change The Face of Chinese Justice? Columbia Journal of Asian Law ,

1-58. 

Cohen, S. (1972). Folk Devils and Moral Panics: The Creation of the Mods and Rockers. London and New York: 

MacGibbon and Kee Ltd. 

Critcher, C. (2008). Moral Panic Analysis: Past, Present and Future. Sociology Compass , 1127 -1144. 

Cullity, G. (2008). Public Goods and Fairness. Australasian Journal of Philosophy , 1 -21. 

Daschner, S., & Obermaier, R. (2022). Algorithm aversion?  On the influence of advice accuracy on trust in algorithmic 

advice. Journal of Decision Systems , 77 -97. 

de Jong, S., Bos, M., van Berkel, N., & Lamers, M. (2025). Algorithm appreciation or aversion: The effects of accuracy 

disclosure on users’ reliance on algorithmic suggestions. Behaviour & Information Technology , 1 -20. 

Dietvorst, B. J., Simmons, J. P., & Massey, C. (2015). Algorithm aversion: People erroneously avoid algorithms after 

seeing them err. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General , 114 -126. 20 

Dietvorst, B. J., Simmons, J. P., & Massey, C. (2018). Overcoming algorithm aversion: People will use imperfect 

algorithms if they can (even slightly) modify them. Management Science , 1155 -1170. 

Dworkin, R. (1986). Law’s Empire. Harvard University Press. 

Flanagan, B., Almeida, G., Chen, D., & Gitahi, A. (2025). The rule of law or the rule of robots? Nationally representative 

survey evidence from Kenya. Information & Communications Technology Law .

Goode, E., & Ben -Yehuda, N. (1994). Moral Panics: The Social Construction of Deviance. Wiley -Blackwell: Oxford, 

England. 

Hagan, M. (2024). Towards human -centered standards for legal help AI. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society 

A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences .

Harasta, J., Novotná, T., & Savelka, J. (2024). It cannot be right if it was written by AI. Artificial Intelligence and Law .

Hart, H. L. (1958). Positivism and the separation of law and morals. Harvard Law Review , 593 -629. 

Hart, H. L. (1961). The Concept of Law. Oxford University Press. 

Hayes, A. F. (2013). Introduction to mediation, moderation, and conditional process analysis: A regression -based 

approach. New York: The Guilford Press. 

Heimstad, S. B., Wien, A. H., & Gaustad, T. (2025). Machine heuristic in algorithm aversion: Perceived creativity and 

effort of output created by or with artificial intelligence. Computers in Human Behavior: Artificial Humans .

Hou, Y. T. -Y., & Jung, M. F. (2021). Who is the expert? Reconciling algorithm aversion and algorithm appreciation in AI -

supported decision making. Proceedings of the ACM on Human -Computer Interaction (pp. 1 -25). ACM 

Journals. 

Hovland, C. I., Janis, I. L., & Kelley, H. H. (1953). Communication and persuasion; psychological studies of opinion 

change. New Haven: Yale University Press. 

Imai, K., Keele, L., & Yamamoto, T. (2010). Identification, inference and sensitivity analysis for causal mediation effects. 

Statistical Science , 51 -71. 

Imbens, G. W., & Rubin, D. B. (2015). Causal Inference for Statistics, Social, and Biomedical Sciences: An Introduction. 

Cambridge University Press. 

Jussupow, E., Benbasat, I., & Heinzl, A. (2020). Why are we averse towards algorithms? A comprehensive literature 

review on algorithm aversion. the 28th European Conference on Information Systems (ECIS 2020) (pp. 1 -17). 

Marrakech, Morocco: ECIS. 

Kizilcec, R. F. (2016). How Much Information?: Effects of Transparency on Trust in an Algorithmic Interface. Proceedings 

of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '16) (pp. 2390 -2395). New York: 

Association for Computing Machinery. 

Kunkel, J., Donkers, T., Michael, L., Barbu, C. -M., & Ziegler, J. (2019). Let Me Explain: Impact of Personal and Impersonal 

Explanations on Trust in Recommender Systems. Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors 

in Computing Systems (CHI '19) (pp. 1 -12). New York: Association for Computing Machinery. 

Liu, Y., & Wang, T. (2025). Treating differently or equally: A study exploring attitudes towards AI moral advisors. 

Technology in Society .

Logg, J. M., Minson, J. A., & Moore, D. A. (2019). Algorithm appreciation: People prefer algorithmic to human judgment. 

Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 90 –103. 21 

Longoni, C., Bonezzi, A., & Morewedge, C. K. (2019). Resistance to medical artificial intelligence. Journal of Consumer 

Research , 629 -650. 

Lu, J. (2016). On randomization -based and regression -based inferences for 2K factorial designs. Statistics & Probability 

Letters , 72 -78. 

Magni, F., Park, J., & Chao, M. M. (2024). Humans as creativity gatekeepers: Are we biased against AI creativity? Journal 

of Business and Psychology , 643 -656. 

Mayer, R. C., Davis, J. H., & Schoorman, F. D. (1995). An Integrative Model of Organizational Trust. The Academy of 

Management Review , 709 -34. 

Molina, M. D., & Sundar, S. S. (2022). When AI moderates online content: effects of human collaboration and 

interactive transparency on user trust. Journal of Computer -Mediated Communication , 1 -12. 

Mosier, K. L., Skitka, L. J., Heers, S., & Burdick, M. (1998). Automation bias: Decision making and performance in high -

tech cockpits. International Journal of Aviation Psychology , 47 -63. 

Ning, X., Lu, Y., Li, W., & Gupta, S. (2024). How transparency affects algorithmic advice utilization: The mediating roles 

of trusting beliefs. Decision Support Systems , 1 -15. 

Parasuraman, R., & Riley, V. (1997). Humans and automation: Use, misuse, disuse, abuse. Human Factors , 230 -253. 

Prahl, A., & Van Swol, L. M. (2017). Understanding algorithm aversion: When is advice from automation discounted? 

Journal of Forecasting , 691 -702. 

Qin, X., Zhou, X., Chen, C., Wu, D., Zhou, H., Dong, X., . . . Lu, J. G. (2025). AI Aversion or Appreciation? A Capability –

Personalization Framework and a Meta -Analytic Review. Psychological Bulletin , 580 -599. 

Raz, J. (1979). The Authority of Law: Essays on Law and Morality. Oxford University Press. 

Riess, H., & Kraft -Todd, G. (2014). E.M.P.A.T.H.Y.: A tool to enhance nonverbal communication between clinicians and 

their patients. Academic Medicine , 1108 -1112. 

Rosseel, Y. (2012). lavaan: An R Package for Structural Equation Modeling. Journal of Statistical Software , 1 -36. 

Schneiders, E., Seabrooke, T., Krook, J., Hyde, R., Leesakul, N., Clos, J., & Fischer, J. (2025). Objection overruled! Lay 

people can distinguish large language models from lawyers, but still favour advice from an LLM. 2025 CHI 

Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’25). Yokohama, Japan: ACM. 

Seabrooke, T., Schneiders, E., Dowthwaite, L., Krook, J., Leesakul, N., Clos, J., . . . Fischer, J. (2024). A survey of lay 

people's willingness to generate legal advice using large language models (LLMs). Second International 

Symposium on Trustworthy Autonomous Systems (TAS ’24) (pp. 1 -5). Austin, TX: ACM. 

Shin, D. (2021). The effects of explainability and causability on perception, trust, and acceptance: Implications for 

explainable AI. International Journal of Human -Computer Studies , 1 -10. 

Spencer, S. J., Zanna, M. P., & Fong, G. T. (2005). Establishing a causal chain: why experiments are often more effective 

than mediational analyses in examining psychological processes. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology ,

845 -51. 

Sundar, S. (2020). Rise of Machine Agency: A Framework for Studying the Psychology of Human –AI Interaction (HAII). 

Journal of Computer -Mediated Communication , 74 –88. 

Turel, O., & Kalhan, S. (2023). Prejudiced against the machine? Implicit associations and the transience of algorithm 

aversion. MIS Quarterly , 1369 -1394. 22 

VanderWeele, T. (2015). Explanation in Causal Inference: Methods for Mediation and Interaction . Oxford: Oxford 

University Press. 

Waismann, F. (1945). Verifiability. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society , (pp. 119 -150). 

Yalcin, G., Lim, S., Puntoni, S., & van Osselaer, S. M. (2022). Thumbs Up or Down: Consumer Reactions to Decisions by 

Algorithms Versus Humans. Journal of Marketing Research , 696 -717.