Title: Mansi_LegalVis_062926.indd

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.30828v1

Published Time: Wed, 01 Jul 2026 00:07:51 GMT

Number of Pages: 13

Markdown Content:
# Drawing Out Legal Risks: Co-Designing with Lawyers to Predict and Manage Legal Uncertainties of Medical AI Tools 

Gennie Mansi 

Georgia Institute of Technology, School of Interactive Computing 

Julia Kim 

Georgia Institute of Technology, School of Interactive Computing 

Michael Rosenbloom 

Harvard School of Law, Cyberlaw Clinic 

Mark Riedl 

Georgia Institute of Technology, School of Interactive Computing 

In the United States, it is critical for people and organizations who create or use medical technology to predict and manage legal risks . Legal risks depend on interrelated, unpredictable, and complicated factors. For creators—such as developers or hospitals—and users—such as doctors—many factors impact legal risk, including the state that they’re working in, who is hurt, intended use, and standard operating procedures [7]. It is also challenging to predict the ultimate costs, such as 

financial and reputational consequences [17, 24]. 

Creators and users analyze potential risks based on current regulations, and they proactively strategize to minimize negative impacts before, during, and after medical technology is made. For example, creators may implement a well-known, structured risk management program and ongoing training 

for current employees [11]. Users, such as doctors, may manage their risks by attending all required 

trainings for technology, reporting errors according to hospital policy, and ensuring their use of atechnology remains in line with broader professional 

standards for care [4, 23]. 

Despite the procedures for minimizing legal risks of new medical technologies, people and organizations are struggling to connect AI tools’ abilities to laws and regulations with which they must comply. The ability of AI-based medical tools to adapt from user-to-user and across different environments is 

a significant strength, but marks a stark shift from 

prior medical technologies whose performance and variance could be fully tested and predetermined 

[18, 20]. Widely respected medical groups warn 

doctors against the use of medical AI tools because it is unclear how the tools’ new abilities connect to 

their existing legal responsibilities [21, 25]. Many 

hospitals are wary of medical AI tools because it is unclear how they may share responsibility when doctors’ uses of these tools result in harms 

to patients [13, 18]. Finally, legal scholars warn 

about gaps between AI tools’ abilities and existing regulations, which may leave patients, their families, and caregivers without pathways for recourse from 

harms resulting from their use [20, 26]. 

Lawyers may be able to help people and organizations identify potential legal risks of existing medical AI tools or situations, but they are not trained to articulate design requirements 

for medical AI tools. Prior work has highlighted the value of engaging with lawyers in co-design methods to incorporate their expertise into the 

design of AI tools for high-stakes environments [12, 16]. However, lawyers differ from technologists in 

their understanding of what AI tools can do [8] and 

are not trained to articulate software features to meet users’ needs. As a result, it is challenging to translate lawyers’ expertise into actionable steps for predicting and managing legal risks throughout the creation and use of medical AI tools. In this pictorial, we contribute insights from our assets-based, co-design process to leverage 

the expertise of U.S. lawyers. We present the visualizations—flowcharts, diagrams, and time 

lines—we co-created with lawyers to construct a 

ABSTRACT 

While there’s optimism around medical AI tools due to 

their abilities to adapt from user-to-user and across environments, these new abilities complicate how people and organizations are able to predict and manage risk based on existing laws and regulations. Lawyers are trained to identify potential legal outcomes, but they lack technical AI knowledge, 

making it difficult to translate their expertise to creators and users of AI tools. We contribute insights from our 

co-design process with U.S. lawyers to identify and translate ways to predict and manage risks of medical 

AI tools. We present the visualizations we developed 

through two years of cross-disciplinary efforts and 

thereby illustrate our findings about how legal risks 

are determined and our strategies for people and 

organizations to predict and manage these risks. We 

offer insights about leveraging lawyers’ expertise to understand, predict, and manage legal risks. 

Authors Keywords Authors Keywords 

Co-Design; Lawyers; Legal Risks; Medical AI Tools Co-Design; Lawyers; Legal Risks; Medical AI Tools 

CSS Concepts CSS Concepts 

• Human-centered computing~Human computer • Human-centered computing~Human computer interaction (HCI)~ HCI design and evaluation interaction (HCI)~ HCI design and evaluation methods methods 

INTRODUCTION 

> Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided
> that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial
> advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on
> the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work
> must be honored. For all other uses, contact the Owner/Author.

shared understanding of the information needed to analyze legal risks and to ideate strategies for predicting and mitigating risks. From our co-design process, we observe that legally-relevant information depends on how laws and regulations recognize harm and on the dynamics between the people and 

organizations creating and using these tools. We fi nd 

ways for people and organizations to predict and manage their legal risks by documenting legally-relevant information where problems are likely to occur and taking action throughout the creation and 

use of medical AI tools. Based on our findings, we 

discuss how creators and users of medical AI tools can leverage lawyers’ expertise. 

LAWYERS’ SKILLS IN RISK ANALYSIS 

Lawyers develop persuasive arguments that connect 

abstract legal theories or principles to specific legal 

situations. As a part of their job, lawyers regularly engage in risk analysis—identifying the legally sig-

nifi cant information in a specifi c situation and how 

it can lead to potential legal outcomes. For example, before proceeding with a particular action, a client may want to know the full range of legal risk they may face in a particular circumstance. Lawyers are trained to avoid speaking ‘off-the-cuff’ about legal risks. Instead, they write legal memoran-dums, or 

legal memos , standalone documents that identify potential and likely claims as well as infor-

mation needed for further investigation [22]. Legal 

memos analyze the entire situation a client is in, pre-senting the full range of legal possibilities resulting 

from the specifi c facts of a situation [6]. 

To write legal memos, lawyers reference 

fact pat-terns , narrative descriptions of the relevant facts in a legal case. They analyze the fact pattern to un-derstand how legal structures and case law may ap-

ply to the facts of their client’s situation [6]. They 

can then identify potential legal outcomes and costs, 

such as fi nancial and reputational costs, from a le-

gal situation. In our co-design process, we leveraged lawyers’ skills in risk analysis to connect the design of medical AI tools to current laws and regulations. 

USING VISUALIZATIONS WITH LAWYERS 

Visualizations can support cross-disciplinary communication needed to translate lawyers’ expertise into actionable steps for those without legal expertise. There are several challenges for engaging in cross-disciplinary co-design with lawyers. Lawyers may not 

understand AI systems’ capabilities [8]. There are also 

noted terminological differences among fi elds, such as computer science and law [3].Design approaches 

with lawyers have successfully used visualizations to 

support cross-disciplinary conversations [9, 10, 19]. For example, the Wikimedia foundation used design 

approaches to re-create their trademark policy and support discussion among its lawyers, contributors, 

and users around the new policy [9]. While this 

work demonstrates the potential for using design approaches with lawyers to innovate legal changes with new technology, there is still need for work to 

explore ways of creating specifi c recommendations 

for the design of AI systems to predict and manage legal risks. 

Note: The content of this paper does not constitute legal advice and should not be construed as a substitute for any legal services from an attorney. 

TERMINOLOGY 

This paper preserves the technical language that 

lawyers use. This sidebar provides defi nitions for 

the legal terms referenced throughout the paper. 

• Entity : a legally recognized organization or struc-ture that can enter into contracts, sue or be sued, and hold property in its own name, separate from the individuals who own or work for it; examples 

include corporations and non-profi ts 

• Party : an individual, organization, or entity in-volved in a legal situation or proceeding 

• Claim : an assertion by one party against another because of the violation of a legal right 

• Harm : injury or damage suffered by one party 

• Plaintiff : the person or organization that starts a lawsuit because they believe they’ve been 

wronged and want the court to help fix the 

problem or award them money 

• Defendant : the person or organization accused of wrongdoing in a lawsuit and who defends themselves against the claims by the plaintiff 

• Facts : the circumstances, events, actions, and conditions that the parties state have occurred 

• Liability : the legal responsibility for something that went wrong 

• Due Diligence : the reasonable investigation, care, and review that a person or organization can be expected to undertake 

• Legal Exposure : the potential risk or liability that a party faces in litigation, including the potential damages, penalties, or adverse outcomes 

• ‘Recognize’ : the formal acknowledgment of a right, claim, relationship, or legal principle 

• Personal Health Information (PHI) : information about health status, healthcare services, or healthcare payments that are linked to a person Situation #11 

A hospital's electronic health record (EHR) system has an AI-based translation tool to help support communication between doctors and patients by translating doctors’ medical notes, patient education materials, and messages into a patient’s preferred language. The doctor selects which documents to translate and send to patients. The translation tool works by scrubbing personally identifiable and protected health information from the document before sending it to an external large language model (LLM) to be translated. The LLM is from a major, reputable company (that is not the EHR company). After the translated content is returned, the tool reinserts scrubbed data back into the document before sending it to the patient. The EHR company claims the tool complies with patient privacy laws and regulations because it scrubs any sensitive patient information before sending it to the external LLM. A physician uses this tool to translate a message into a language that they do not speak or understand. The text they ask the tool to translate contains protected health information. Later, it is discovered that protected health information was not being properly scrubbed and was actually sent to the external LLM. Assume that the patient comes to you for legal assistance. 1. What claims are there and against who? Are there facts that are not given in the description that might determine the outcome? If so, what are those facts and what are the range of outcomes? Now assume you’re the physician's lawyer. 2. How would you defend any claims made against the physician? Are there facts that are not given in the description that might determine the outcome? If so, what are those facts and what are the range of outcomes? 3. What would you have advised the physician to do (or not) beforehand to minimize the risk of being sued beforehand? 

to help

ctors’

nguage. The doctor

odel (LLM) to be

he EHR company). Aftftf er

ck into the document

on befofof re sending it to the

el (LLM) to be

Relevant areas of health law 

This fact pattern focuses on two opportunities: routine patient communication and translating educational materials and health information [14] 

AI-based trannslation tool

support communication between doctors and patients translating medical notes,

patient education materials, and messages

We use opportunities for AI identified 

as clinically useful by the National 

Academy of Medicine (NAM), a leading US health policy advisory group [14] We include concerns for medical AI applications that the NAM highlighted We include information tied to a specifi c 

relevant area of health law 

scrubbing personally identifiable and prooteected health infofof rmation

sending it to the patient. The EHR company claims the tool commplies with patient privacy

external LLM.

A physician uses this tool to translate a message into

discovered that protected health infofof rmation was no

Based on the annotated fl owchart and diagram, we co-create 

strategies for predicting and managing risk. 

Findings 4-6 and their visualizations are from this step. 

We include explicit prompts asking for specifi c legal information from different 

parties Now assume you’re the physician's lawye

Assume that the patient comes to you fofof r

One-on-One Interview Sessions Understanding the Information Lawyers Need for Risk Analysis Connecting Lawyers’ Risk Analysis to the Creation and Use of Medical AI Tools Co-Creating Strategies to Predict and Manage Risk 

We analyze the legal memos and interview transcripts, co-creating a fl owchart and diagram for each fact pattern. 

Findings 1-2 and their visualizations are from this step. 

We annotate the fl owchart to identify connections with the 

design of medical AI tools. 

Finding 3 and its visualizations are from this step. 

We present each step of our co-design process below and note 

which findings and visualizations 

relate to each step. 

Clinical concerns for medical AI tools Clinical opportunities for medical AI tools 

Each fact pattern incorporated 4 elements 

To engage participants’ risk analysis skills, we asked them to write legal memos based on fact patterns 

involving doctors’ uses of medical AI tools. Because lawyers are trained to avoid spontaneous responses, 

we emailed participants a fact pattern and asked them to respond asynchronously. We conducted 

15-minute follow-up interviews within 1-2 weeks to discuss their memos. Below we annotate the fact pattern for our running example. 

Using an asset-based [27] approach, we worked closely with two lawyers (who we refer to as project partners )—one in tort law and medical technology, 

the other in policy and platform regulation—to co-create interview protocols eliciting lawyers’ skills in risk analysis. We then conducted one-on-one interviews with 8 other lawyers (who we refer to as participants ) to identify information impacting legal risks from the use of medical AI tools for seven 

unique fact patterns matching their different areas of expertise in health law (see ‘One-on-One Interview Sessions’ under 

Co-Design Process below). 

With our project partners, we analyzed interview data and co-created visualizations—fl owcharts, diagrams, and time 

lines—to construct a shared understanding of the interview data and ideate strategies. From each interview, we co-created 

a fl owchart of the information needed to analyze risk and a diagram of the dynamics between parties. Together, we connected the flowchart to the creation and use of medical AI tools. Using these visualizations, we co-created a time line of 

strategies for predicting and managing legal risks. 

s

e

r

st who? Are there facts that are not given in the

he outcome? If so, what are those facts and what are

er.

r legal assistance.

We specify an area of health law corresponding to the clinical concerns We ask the participant to provide information for the patient and doctor 

Co-Create Interview Protocols 

or

ntains protected health infofof rmation. Later, it

and was

a language that they do not speak

ot being properly scrubbed

ance

With our two project partners, we co-create fact patterns 

(example to the right) and interview protocols to leverage lawyers’ assets. 

co-design process below and note 

which findings and visualizations 

We include data privacy and security as a major risk for the clinical use of medical AI tools 

We conduct one-on-one interviews with lawyers. Each lawyer receives a unique fact pattern matching their expertise, 

except for two participants who overlapped in their area of 

focus. We collect and anonymize legal memos; interviews are 

recorded and transcribed. 

Specifi c prompt to consider 

risks for different parties Connectors are used in multiple ways.... 

This pictorial presents visualizations we created in our study, analysis from 

those visualizations, and fi ndings. The 

visualizations that we co-designed represent the many factors impacting legal risk, as translated from participants’ memos. In this pictorial, we annotate the visualizations with our analysis and the themes we surfaced around predicting and managing legal risks. The annotations reveal rich details of lawyers’ tacit knowledge and the challenges of predicting and mitigating legal risks. The use of visualizations in our work and this pictorial is motivated by the need for shared accessibility and explorations among cross-disciplinary experts. Prior work has called for the creation of design artifacts that can serve as boundary objects, promoting shared understandings among the legal 

and technology communities [16]. The 

pictorial describes what we learned from using the visualizations as boundary objects with our project partners, 

and communicates our fi ndings with the broader research community. We 

overlay hand drawn illustrations created 

by the fi rst author from her reflections 

on emergent themes surfaced through the co-design process. Layering the annotated study artifacts and hand drawn illustrations, we literally draw out the legal risks, informing a richer understanding of the legal complexity embedded in the design of medical AI tools and advancing practices for collaboration. 

Element in the artifact Element in the artifact Element in the artifact 

The visualizations we co-created with study partners; made of non-hand drawn digital shapes and outlined with black boxes 

Study Artifact Hand drawn lettering, bubbles, arrows, and connectors contextualizing salient charac-teristics of the artifacts with our analysis; on this page, we provide examples of an-notations in shades of green and teal 

Annotations 

Element in the artifact Element in the artifact Element in the artifact 

Other colors of bubbles or outlines highlight illustrative statements or oth-er parts of the artifacts; darker tones of the same color used for emphasis 

We supplement quotes and fi nd-

ing summaries with explanations in bubble outlines articulating a 

statement’s signifi cance 

“Participant quotes may be placed on top of or next to the artifact” (Ln) 

The handlettered title summa-rizes the page’s main takeaway Green bubbles, such as this one, high-

light the summary of our fi ndings 

Not all artifact elements will have a colored back-ground 

Illustrations 

Drawings by the fi rst author refl ect emer-

gent themes surfaced through the co-design process; not on every page Connectors look like a series of bubbles that link components on the page to indicate con-nections between related parts or ideas Some elements will have round corners 

Every Finding has 3 visual components: a study artifact, annotations of our analysis, and illustrations. Below we describe and provide examples of these three 

components and unpack the visual elements used to present our Findings. Arrows are used to point 

at a specifi c element or 

highlight the order for reading annotations Depicting a compass, this illustration highlights themes 

of wayfinding and navigation; 

illustrations may be next to or on top of artifacts Light blue hand drawn bubbles signal broader commentary about the design process that contextualizes the artifacts 

and fi ndings; not on every 

page To visually group and link parts of the artifact to 

an annotation or quote 

The gray outline symbol-izes the edge of our example page and will not be on other pages To link related annotations Lighter green bubbles, such as this 

one, indicate individual fi ndings from 

our analysis 

Study artifacts are out-lined with black boxes like this one Less due diligence required from 

the doctor because the workplace 

requires the tool 

Doctor 

Are you required to use the medical AI translation tool by your workplace (e.g. hospital) or are you choosing to use it? 

Determines the level of due diligence that’s expected 

Yes, I am required to use the tool No, I am not required to use the 

tool 

Are you recording someone’s voice or image as input into the system? 

Some state privacy laws may require explicit disclosure when live recording 

audio, taking images, and/or footage for input into a system If a patient signed a disclosure agreement with the workplace, then the doctor may not (techni-cally) need an additional authoriza-tion 

Hospital 

Even if not required, seeking ad-

ditional consent can help maintain patients’ trust with doctors, making a lawsuit less likely 

Participants identifi ed where doctors and organiza-

tions needed the same or similar information to determine their legal risk. 

...

We drew connecting arrows across shared information needs; for readability, we show a subset of the arrows. 

Do you already have a Business Associates Agreement (BAA) with the vendor (i.e. devel-

BAA’s are contracts used to identify uses of PHI and obligate vendors to comply with regulations; Hospitals need to make vendors sign BAA’s to ensure vendors safeguard PHI 

Are the following aspects of how the tool uses PHI covered in the BAA agreement with vendor and subcontractors? 

The High Tech Act means any entity to which the 

EHR company relayed PHI (and knew it was PHI) 

would need to comply with HIPAA 

How is patient data and PHI used? Who can acquire patient data and how? What are the po-tential risks to patients if there is a data breach? 

If this risk analysis is not correctly completed and data is improperly disclosed, the hospital is 

required to comply with the Data Breach Notifi ca-tion, resulting in signifi cant costs and potential 

reputational damages to the hospital 

The HIPAA Security Rule requires a covered entity 

to do an accurate and thorough risk analysis of the potential threats to electronic health informa-tion and how the covered entity will mitigate those threats Patients may be more likely to sue if they feel they are injured from a tool the doctor chose to use on their own, so doctors must take extra care when obtaining consent by explaining potential harm, ensuring patients understand potential negative outcomes, and making sure they sign an authori-zation document 

Participants identifi ed nested questions, meaning the answer to one question indicated subsequent questions they needed to ask. To refl ect this, the fl owchart uses diverging paths of questions , which we show for the doctor. 

Participants needed information from doctors and hospitals to determine if a legally recognized harm could have occurred based on legal standards 

We bold the questions they would ask each party to elicit legally-relevant information, identify-ing the underlying legal reason and negative outcomes ing the underlying legal reason and negative ing the underlying legal reason and negative ing the underlying legal reason and negative 

outcomes 

ing the underlying legal reason and negative 

Do you need additional authorization or consent from the patient to use the tool? 

The doctor could face an informed consent claim by the patient for the 

doctor’s failing to adequately disclose the risks about the tool and obtain 

consent The doctor could face a privacy violation for using an AI tool that fails to 

keep patient data confi dential in the right context More due diligence required from 

the doctor to understand how the tool works and prevent harms to patients If a BAA is not signed or does not include the 

these required aspects, the hospital is legally and fi nancially responsible for improper disclosures of 

patient data 

Information can be relevant to the risk of multiple people and organizations Legal risk relies on interdependent pieces of information Information from multiple people and organizations determines each party’s legal risk 

With our project partners, we co-created two visualizations to represent participants’ legal analysis. The fi rst visualization (shown on this page) illustrates 

that legally-relevant information depends on how laws and regulations recognize harm. The second visualization (shown on the following page) illustrates 

how legal risks depend on dynamics between parties. Later, we discuss how we leveraged the fi ndings from these visualizations 

to co-create strategies for predicting and managing legal risks. 

Participants said legally-relevant information depends on how current laws and regulations recognize harm .Participants’ risk analysis centered on identifying how the situation in the fact pattern could connect to harms recognized by current laws and regulations. Participants noted the risk exposure of different parties is determined by the legal 

requirements to successfully 

prove a harm had occurred. Participants described the information in the fact pattern that could satisfy these legal 

requirements and the additional 

information they would need to make a determination of the most likely legal risks. 

We created a flowchart with the 

information participants needed to determine legal risk. On this page, we annotate a subsection 

of this fl owchart for the doctors 

and hospital, highlighting three observations about the information determining legal risks. The same observations hold for other parties, who we discuss more later. 

For example, the doctor and hospital need information about authorized uses of patient data, patient consent, and potential harms Hospital Developer Patient Doctor 

Participants said legal risks— including the kinds of claims raised, if claims are successful, and what each party may be able to do to change these risks—depended on the decisions and actions of different 

parties. To identify potential legal risks, lawyers traced how parties connected, noting that while parties further from the patient would be diffi cult to successfully sue they could still make decisions that deeply 

impacted patients. Below, we illustrate how legal risks from the translation tool are affected by the distance and dynamics between different parties. Lawyers said patients are most likely to sue doctors when they perceive they are harmed because they are interacting with the doctors face-to-face. However, claims made by patients are not likely to be successful because it would be hard to meet the legal conditions to prove harm by doctors or others. As a result, once the tool is used, patients have limited options 

for avoiding harm in the first place or 

achieving recourse via a successful lawsuit. 

“Plaintiffs would have great diffi culty 

bringing any of these claims due to the high injury demonstration requirement” (L1) 

Starting with the central relationship between the doc-tor and patient, shown in the circle, participants worked backwards to identify the links between stakeholders in the ‘ecosystem’ of a case 

Participants identifi ed hospitals and developers as ‘far away’ decision 

makers whose decisions could impact the patient and doctor Developers are placed furthest away because they do not have direct relationships with patients, making it hardest for patients to bring claims against them 

“The further remote an entity is from the individual who is claiming an injury, the harder it is often to bring a suc-cessful claim” (L1) 

Participants identifi ed hospitals and developers as ‘far away’ decision 

Doctors face the highest legal risks, and rely on hospitals’ work to manage risks. 

Lawyers said patients are most likely to sue doctors because they interact with them face-to-face. However, doctors rely on the hospital for procedures guid-

ing adoption and use of the tool. Even 

if claims aren’t successful, doctors may experience reputational and psychological 

“But for the most part, there’s not a lot they [doctors] can do. You know, they’re really relying upon...the diligence and the analysis...[of] the hospital” (L8) Doctors are incentivized to avoid using the tool if they feel it will cause harms to patients. 

Developers are incentivized to sell their product, so they may be willing to meet performance requirements specifi ed by the hospital 

Hospitals face legal, reputational and fi nancial incentives that align their interests with doctors’ interests 

When doctors are sued, hospitals are also typically sued, resulting in fi nancial and reputational consequences. 

If doctors are sued more often, malpractice insurance premiums may also increase, further raising costs. Finally, hospitals may waste money if they procure and trial a technology only to have their doctors avoid using it. Hospitals determine major aspects of how doctors use medical tools, such as approved uses, error reporting 

procedures, required training, and consent procedures that impact patients’ health or perceptions of providers. 

The hospital has economic power over developers to infl uence the tool’s design, impacting legal risks The hospital defi nes the policies impacting doctors’ legal risks 

“If something goes wrong, a patient’s going to sue everybody. They’re going to sue the hospital, they’re going to sue the doctor...” (L4) Developers’ incentives are to sell their technology to hospitals, and not necessarily aligned with doctors’ or patients’ interests. “Look at the possible defendants in a case like an ecosystem...” (L5) 

“Decisions are made so far away from that central relationship, even though they deeply will affect individual patients” (L1).  is claiming an injury, the harder it is often to bring a suc-

Developers are incentivized to sell their product, so they may be willing to meet performance requirements 

specifi ed by the hospital specifi ed by the hospital   

> Hospital Developer Patient Doctor

cessful claim”  (L1) “Look at the possible defendants in a case like an 

ecosystem...”  (L5) 

The hospital has the most power to mitigate legal risks of the translation tool 

The hospital’s decisions and actions impact developers, 

doctors, and, ultimately, patients, including mitigating risks. We 

visually connect hospitals with doctors and developers to show how hospitals are in a position to mitigate risks. 

Patients have limited options for avoiding harm and seeking recourse. Doctor 

Less due diligence required from 

the doctor because the workplace 

requires the tool 

Are you required to use the medical AI translation tool by your workplace (e.g. hospital) or are you choosing to use it? 

Determines the level of due diligence that’s expected 

Yes, I am required to use the tool No, I am not required to use the 

tool 

Are you recording someone’s voice or image as input into the system? 

Some state privacy laws may require explicit disclosure when live recording 

audio, taking images, and/or footage for input into a system If a patient signed a disclosure agreement with the workplace, then the doctor may not (techni-cally) need an additional authoriza-tion 

Even if not required, seeking ad-

ditional consent can help maintain patients’ trust with doctors, making a lawsuit less likely Patients may be more likely to sue if they feel they are injured from a tool the doctor chose to use on their own, so doctors must take extra care when obtaining consent by explaining potential harm, ensuring patients understand potential negative outcomes, and making sure they sign an authori-zation document 

More due diligence required from 

the doctor to understand how the tool works and prevent harms to patients 

Do you need additional authorization or consent from the patient to use the tool? 

The doctor could face an informed consent claim by the patient for the 

doctor’s failing to adequately disclose the risks about the tool and obtain 

consent ... and algorithmic information about how new patient data is incorporated into the tool ( Data Sourcing and Use )... To understand if they need an additional consent or authorization, doctors need to connect algorithmic ele-ments of AI tools’ design with social elements by.... • referencing prior authorizations or disclosure agree-ments ( Cross References ) to check if/how they are allowed to input patient data through the tool ( Data Sourcing and Use )• identifying potential impacts on patient health ( Con-sequences for Stakeholders ) based on the model’s performance as compared to human translators (Model Specifications )• understanding how to communicate with patients about privacy harms ( Consequences for Users ) based on how the patient’s data connects to the model (Data Sourcing and Use )Doctors need social information about the tool, such as potential data privacy harms for patients ( Consequenc-es for Stakeholders ) and their legal obligations around communicating harms to patients ( Consequences for Users )... 

On subsequent pages, Findings 4-6 present our visualizations of the strategies that we co-created to understand how to predict and manage risks. 

Doctor Hospital  

> Less due diligence required from
> the doctor because the workplace
> requires the tool
> Are you required to use the medical AI translation tool by your workplace (e.g. hospital) or are you choosing to use it?
> Determines the level of due diligence that’s expected in court
> Yes, I am required to use the tool No, I am not required to use the tool
> Are you recording someone’s voice or image as input into the system?
> Some state privacy laws may require explicit disclosure when live recording audio,
> taking images, and/or footage for input into a system If a patient signed a disclosure agreement with the workplace, then the doctor may not (technically) need an additional authorization
> Even if not required, seeking
> additional consent can help maintain patients’ trust with doctors, making a lawsuit less likely Patients may be more likely to sue if they feel they are injured from a tool the doctor chose to use on their own, so doctors must take extra care when obtaining consent by explaining potential harm, ensuring patients understand potential nega-tive outcomes, and making sure they sign an authorization document
> Do you need additional authorization or consent from the patient to use the tool?
> The doctor could face an informed consent claim by the patient for the doctor’s
> failing to adequately disclose the risks about the tool and obtain consent
> The doctor could face a privacy violation for using an AI tool that fails to keep
> patient data confi dential in the right context More due diligence required
> from the doctor to understand how the tool works and prevent harms to patients
> Do you already have a Business Associates Agreement (BAA) with the vendor (i.e. developer)?
> BAA’s are contracts used to identify uses of PHI and obligate vendors to comply with regulations; Hospitals need to make vendors sign BAA’s to ensure vendors safeguard PHI
> Are the following aspects of how the tool uses PHI covered in the BAA agreement with vendor and subcontractors?
> The High Tech Act means any entity to
> which the EHR company relayed PHI
> (and knew it was PHI) would need to comply with HIPAA
> How is patient data and PHI used? Who can acquire patient data and how? What are the potential risks to patients if there is a data breach?
> If this risk analysis is not correctly com-pleted and data is improperly disclosed,
> the hospital is required to comply with the Data Breach Notifi cation, resulting in signifi cant costs and potential reputational
> damages to the hospital
> The HIPAA Security Rule requires a
> covered entity to do an accurate and thorough risk analysis of the potential threats to electronic health information and how the covered entity will mitigate those threats If a BAA is not signed or does not include
> the these required aspects, the hospital is legally and financially responsible for
> improper disclosures of patient data

Working with our project partners, we used the information categories about AI tools provided by [15] to annotate our visualization of the legally-relevant information. We fi nd legally-relevant information is related to 

algorithmic and 

social elements of AI tools’ design. We used our two visualizations— of the legally-relevant information and the dynamics between parties—to co-create strategies for people and organizations to predict and manage legal risks. On this page, we use the doctor 

side of the fl owchart from Finding 1 to demonstrate how we identifi ed 

connections to AI tools’ design. For readability, we show a selection of the annotations we made of the elements of AI tools’ design. Consequences for Stakeholders Consequences for Users Cross References Consequences for Users Consequences for Stakeholders 

Data Sourcing and Use 

Model Specifi cations 

Data Sourcing and Use User Variables 

Dark blue bubbles show 

Information Categories from [15] 

about algorithmic information impacting how AI tools work 

Yellow bubbles show Information Categories from 

[15] about social processes 

impacting how AI tools work 

The doctor needs algorithmic 

and social information 

together to understand how to use the tool in light of potential legal risks With our partners, we analyzed the visualizations 

based on the participant interviews and co-created strategies for predicting and managing risks. The 

strategies refl ect a key insight from this process: risks 

do not emerge at a single point but accumulate across 

the AI tool’s adoption. Consequently, we created a new visualization (seen right) of a timeline to reflect how the 

strategies address risks throughout the four stages of the AI tool’s adoption. Because participants indicated hospitals had the greatest ability to impact legal risks, we framed the strategies from their perspective. Later, we discuss how others can reference the same strategies. 

Similar to legal risks, strategies connected to both the algorithmic and social processes impacting AI tools throughout their creation and use 

For example, before procurement a hospital should double check there is a HIPAA-compliant risk assessment that includes data security risks for the 

LLM Engaging with physician leadership and including 

doctors from procurement to deployment in the creation and use of the tool is critical to predicting and mitigating risks. Likewise, collaborating with developers to develop appropriate metrics before procurement can help with predicting and managing risks. 

For example, a hospital should require error metrics 

corresponding to concrete harms.... •Before procurement to identify if and how the tool is causing concrete harms, and to avoid procurement if necessary •During procurement to ensure the tool will continue to include and document these measures as acontractual condition •

While trialing the tool to ensure the metrics 

accurately refl ect harms that doctors are seeing. Metrics should be updated to ensure new concrete harms are also measured and reflected We place check marks under 

the stage(s) in which each strategy should take place Strategies are shown in purple Strategies are shown in purple 

Check if the tool won’t actually create more work or stress for providers, patients, and the hospital Check if the tool is really useful in this context (e.g. Is it better to use a human translator? How do we decide when to use the AI tool?) 

Ensure the tool’s technology and use by doctors are covered by 

malpractice insurance Double check the Risk Assessment for the HIPAA Security Rule covers 

the business associate (i.e. EHR company and third parties), and includes data security risks for the LLM 

Ask the vendor for the Risk Assessment document and make sure it discloses/discusses the risks around the tool 

Ensure system performance measures/reports include, regularly 

validate, and document HIPAA compliance measures 

Contractually require and include error metrics to correspond to characteristics of concrete harms as legally defi ned 

Demonstrate how accuracy metrics were created and measured, 

including how it refl ects potential impacts to patient health (e.g. 

measure translation errors with different severities; weight aggregate accuracy measures according to potential impacts to patient health) Demonstrate how accuracy metrics were created and align with 

measures of quality preceding the tool 

Collaborate with doctors on reporting measures and processes to more easily identify the presence of new errors 

Ensure the interface features correspond to error reporting protocols 

and help doctors easily report potential errors 

Ensure there are clear protocols to help doctors know when, where, and 

how to use or report the system 

Ensure physician training covers consent procedures, use of the tool 

error reporting, and other AI governance policies 

In physician training, error reporting, and all offi cial protocols, clearly 

communicate the division of responsibility among doctors, the hospital, and developer to protect patient privacy 

Engage with physician leadership (e.g. Chief of Division) to foster 

physician support and engagement for the tool Iteratively pilot language with physicians for use with patients to maintain trust while obtaining consent to use the tool 

Before Procurement During Procurement During Trialing Deployment & Monitoring 

...or across multiple stages A strategy could contribute to predicting and managing risks through just one stage... .Because legally-relevant information is tied to the ways that laws and regulations recognize harm, people and organizations can document this information to predict and manage risks. Some strategies focused on documenting legally-relevant information through legal documents, while others focused on documenting legally-relevant information through the AI tool’s algorithmic implementation and processes impacting operation. Below we present a selection of these strategies. 

A legal document can record information directly tied to legal 

requirements 

The tool’s error or performance metrics can record information 

related to legal requirements 

The tool could also record information that could be used for legal 

action, although it doesn’t correspond to a legal defi nition 

The tool’s design needs to record legally-relevant information that directly corresponds to legal documents or requirements 

As a result, the tool (by design) would record metrics around 

accuracy corresponding to the legal defi nition for concrete 

harms 

Measureable aspects of patient health and translation quality don’t necessarily correspond to legal definitions, but can be used to meet legal requirements for proving harm in a lawsuit For example, the hospital can contractually require the vendor 

to have certain kinds of error metrics targeted at legal harms For example, for regulations such as HIPAA, a risk assessment document records legally relevant information corresponding to HIPAA Security Rule about how the tool processes, uses, and shares patient data Similarly, the tool can regularly record and document performance metrics explicitly targeted at HIPAA compliance 

Critically, the legal documents and tool’s design work in tandem 

Multiple strategies use legal documents to capture information that can predict or manage risks 

A legal document can contractually specify a performance standard corresponding to concrete harms, which could help a hospital predict risks by identifying when legally reocgnized harms are occurring. In turn, the tool’s design would correspond to this legal standard, helping the hospital manage related legal risks by actively identifying when and where harms are occurring. To the right, we use orange and blue annotations to show how the strategies contain a mix of approaches for documenting legally-relevant information, and demonstrate how these approaches should be taken together. 

A legal document can contractually specify and obligate developers 

to meet performance standards related to legal requirements 

Together, the legal documents and the tool’s design protect the hospital by creating the infrastructures needed to document legally-relevant information before harms occur. 

> Contractually require and include error metrics to correspond to characteristics of concrete harms as legally defi ned
> Double check there is a Risk Assessment for HIPAA Security Rule
> covers the business associate (i.e. EHR company and third parties),
> and the HIPAA Risk Assessment covers data security risks related
> to the LLM

Documenting through Legal Documents 

> Ask the vendor for the Risk Assessment document and make sure it discloses/discusses the risks around the tool
> Ensure system performance measures/reports include, regularly
> validate, and document HIPAA compliance measures Demonstrate how accuracy metrics were created and measured,
> including how it refl ects potential impacts to patient health
> (e.g. measure translation errors with different severities; weight aggregate accuracy measures according to potential impacts to patient health) Demonstrate how accuracy metrics were created and align with
> measures of quality preceding the tool

Documenting through Technology Designs People and organizations are best positioned to predict and manage risks through information related to harms that are “known knowns” and “known unknowns”. By understanding how strategies document different kinds of harms, people and organizations can how they are navigating the underlying landscape of legal risks. Below we use orange and blue annotations to show the strategies address risks from harms that are known knowns and known unknowns. Other harms are known knowns because the same harms can still occur with medical AI tools These strategies gather information to design processes with current best practices Some harms are known knowns based on existing laws and regulations that will apply to medical AI tools The strategies gather information related to these known regulations Finally harms are known knowns because of common ways of establishing a claim The strategies gather information that can be extrapolated based on prior approaches to establishing a claim Double check the Risk Assessment for the HIPAA Security Rule covers 

> the business associate (i.e. EHR company and third parties), and includes data security risks for the LLM

Ask the vendor for the Risk Assessment document and make sure it discloses/discusses the risks around the tool 

Ensure system performance measures/reports include, regularly 

validate, and document HIPAA compliance measures Demonstrate how accuracy metrics were created and measured, 

including how it refl ects potential impacts to patient health 

(e.g. measure translation errors with different severities; weight aggregate accuracy measures according to potential impacts to patient health) Collaborate with doctors on reporting measures and processes to more easily identify the presence of new errors 

> Ensure the interface features correspond to error reporting protocols
> and help doctors easily report potential errors

Ensure there are clear protocols to help doctors know when/where/ 

how to use or report the system in the case that they are made known of an error 

Ensure physician training covers consent procedures, use of the 

tool error reporting, and other AI governance policies 

Ensure the tool’s technology and use by doctors are covered by 

malpractice insurance Check if the tool won’t actually create more work or stress for providers, patients, and the hospital 

Engage with physician leadership (e.g. Chief of Division) to foster 

physician support and engagement for the tool Iteratively pilot language with physicians for use with patients to maintain trust while obtaining consent to use the tool Check if the tool is really useful in this context (e.g. Is it better to use a human translator? How do we decide when to use the AI tool?) Some harms are known unknowns because of common problems with medical technology development and adoption The strategies gather information to methodically test and seek out these problems.... Some harms are 

known knowns : those related to the design of medical AI tools that are more easily anticipated based on current laws and regulations Strategies gather information in multiple ways in anticipation of these known knowns Other harms are 

known unknowns : reasonable expectations about where problems could occur in the design of medical AI tools, though the exact nature of the problem is unknown Strategies gather information in multiple ways to prevent harms that are known unknowns ...and create a responsive environment to the concerns of those impacted by the technologies, such as doctors and patients HIPAA is a federal law that recognizes patient privacy harms. HIPAA applies to medical AI tools in the same way as other medical technology. A hospital can anticipate the need to gather information to predict and manage risk of this harm. Some harms are known unknowns because of reasonable expectations about variability in AI tools’ performance The strategies gather information that can serve as early ‘warning signs’ about previously unencountered errors 

Malpractice insurance currently protects doctors from fi nancial 

loss in lawsuits for negligence or injury when treating patients. 

Medical AI tools may need to be added to insurance, but the 

strategy is functionally known. Based on current legal standards, a measurable impact on patient health could constitute the basis for a claim. By explicitly connecting metrics to impacts on patient health, a hospital can gather information to predict and manage risk from these kinds of harms before they happen. Similarly, training is a key best practice when trialing and deploying a technology to ensure doctors understand its proper uses and procedures. A hospital can anticipate and incorporate information for consent procedures and error reporting which are especially important for medical AI tools AI tools are known to adapt and vary their performance to tailor 

their outputs to different users or environments. Consequently, 

a hospital can anticipate errors to occur after the medical AI tool is deployed, even though the exact nature of those errors isn’t known. A hospital can anticipate the need to gather information about these errors by coordinating with doctors, and ensuring clear interface features and protocols for error reporting. 

Many medical technologies are developed that don’t add value 

to clinical settings, which has time pressures and constraints. A hospital can anticipate the need to understand if the medical AI tool is clinically useful throughout its procurement, trialing, and deployment. 

Even when a technology is deployed, many doctors may not use it unless required. A hospital can anticipate the need to 

gather information about their providers’ concerns and support their engagement with the medical AI tool in order to avoid wasted resources. PREDICTING & MANAGING LEGAL RISKS 

Our assets-based, co-design approach surfaced lawyers’ tacit knowledge , enabling us to engage in cross-disciplinary communication to work alongside 

them to predict and manage legal risks. We worked 

with our two project partners to co-design the interview protocol and fact patterns, analyze the interview data, identify legally-relevant information about medical AI tools, and develop strategies to predict and mitigate risks. Using our interview 

protocol, we elicited 8 lawyers’ skills in risk analysis, 

identifying the kinds of information needed to analyze legal risks and the dynamics between parties shaping those risks. 

Our findings confirm prior work [9, 10, 19] on using 

visualizations in cross-disciplinary design with lawyers, extending these findings to predicting and managing legal risks from AI tools . Our work demonstrates how visualizations overcome multiple 

asymmetries in expertise. Creating the flowchart 

from the interviews helped non-lawyers on our team understand lawyers’ tacit knowledge about the structure of the legal risks, such as how risks rely on interdependent pieces of information from multiple 

people or organizations. The flowchart provided 

space for our project partners to communicate their own analysis of the interviews, including points of 

significance. On the flowcharts, information about AI 

tools’ design helped our project partners understand legally-relevant information from the interviews connected to the algorithmic and social processes impacting the design of AI tools. 

For the first time, to the best of our knowledge ,we leverage fact patterns and visualizations to generatively co-create strategies for predicting and managing legal risks. Based on our analysis of the 

dynamics between parties, we identified the hospital 

as the entity with the most power to mitigate risks 

from the translation tool. We highlighted how doctors 

and patients rely on the hospital’s work to manage 

risks. With our project partners, we framed strategies from the perspective of the hospital to reflect 

their power to impact risks for other stakeholders. Our strategies highlight several takeaways around predicting and managing risks that go beyond the hospital, including how risk mitigation takes place throughout the medical AI tool’s creation and use 

by documenting legally-relevant information. We 

also highlight how people and organizations are best positioned to address the “known knowns” and “known unknowns” driving legal risks. This pictorial serves as an example of how 

visualizations support communication beyond the co-design team . By layering the study visualizations and the hand drawn illustrations, our team synthesizes takeaways from the co-design process itself. Through our illustration of the dynamics between 

parties, we highlight our reflections on the distance 

between those impacted by legal risks—patients and doctors—and those who are able to make design decisions about medical AI tools—hospitals and 

developers. Our illustrations amplify our reflections 

on how legal documents and the AI tool’s design document legally-relevant information together. By drawing out the legal risks , we can communicate both the complexity of addressing legal risks and the broader implications of our findings about who 

is at risk and how those risks can be mitigated. 

> TRANSLATING THE STRATEGIES FOR OTHERS

While this pictorial presented strategies from the 

hospital’s perspective, other parties can use them to understand how their interests align and how they can collaborate to lower their legal risks . For example, doctors would see that they should check that the use of the AI translation tool is covered by their malpractice insurance. Doctors can also talk to their Chief of Division about the tool and ways 

for their division to influence its procurement and 

deployment. They can also ask for access to legal 

counsel or specific trainings around legal risks. 

Developers could understand how to better tailor and market to the interests of hospitals and doctors. Administrators for health organizations already identify the need to minimize their legal risks for 

AI-based technologies [1, 2]. Further, if doctors’ legal 

concerns around medical AI tools are not addressed, they may opt out of using the tools altogether, 

resulting in wasted resources and lack of benefit from their deployment [5]. Developers can build their 

products in line with risk mitigation strategies that minimize hospitals’ and doctors’ risks. For example, developers could see the importance of preemptively conducting risk assessments and performance and metrics tied to HIPAA compliance. 

> UNEVENLY DISTRIBUTED RISKS

Lawyers’ strategies for risk mitigation highlighted how legal risks, and the power to mitigate risks, are not evenly distributed across parties . While doctors 

were most likely to be sued, they are not the party with the most power in the procurement, trialing, and development of a medical AI translation tool. 

Meanwhile, developers play a critical role in how an 

AI tool is designed, but they were not the party most at risk of legal action. Their distance from patients made it hard to legally demonstrate injury and bring a claim. Hospitals, due to their economic power and 

ability to make influential decisions around how 

doctors use the translation AI tool, are the party with the greatest ability to mitigate risks. 

Significantly, lawyers’ analysis highlighted the 

limited options for patients to seek recourse or mitigate risks from harms due to the translation tool. Patients could (and probably would) raise lawsuits in response to perceived injuries, but they were unlikely to have successful claims or to receive monetary compensation for harms. The main incentives for hospitals to undertake risk mitigation strategies were to avoid harms to doctors (not patients), such as increased legal action against them, and to prevent the waste of resources towards a tool doctors would 

not use because of unknown legal risks. Consequently, 

lawyers’ primary recommendations for patients was rejecting the use of the AI translation tool. 

Even when patients have legal protections, our project 

partners repeatedly emphasized that patients are only protected against harms that are recognized by laws and regulations . For example, some harms to patient 

privacy may not be reflected in HIPAA. Further, even if 

a hospital follows strategies to protect patient privacy according to HIPAA, patients may still experience other privacy harms. This speaks to existing concerns in the legal community about how some AI tools may cause harms in ways that are not legally recognized, leaving patients without a legal path to recourse 

[20, 26]. Consequently, strategies can predict and manage risks that are legally-recognized, but do not 

necessarily provide sufficient or complete protection 

for patients .

> REFLECTION AND FUTURE WORK

We see our work as furthering understanding of how 

to design AI tools in response to legal risks. Using fact patterns, we were able to engage lawyers’ expertise around risk analysis to identify legally-relevant information including algorithmic and social processes impacting the design of AI tools. In our example, doctors and hospitals often shared incentives for predicting and managing risks. But we acknowledge 

the dynamics between parties may vary significantly in other scenarios and require different strategies for 

predicting and managing risks. For example, more powerful parties may choose to selectively follow strategies in ways that leave more vulnerable parties exposed. Future work should explore how risks and dynamics between parties shift in other domains and identify legal or technological gaps that leave parties unprotected. 

Finally, we extend prior work [9, 10] that uses 

visualizations to support interdisciplinary conversations with lawyers. Future work should explore how visualizations can help other diverse stakeholders communicate with lawyers to identify concrete recommendations for AI tools and shape risk mitigation in light of legal infrastructures. 

> ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
> MANY THANKS TO BENJAMIN SUNDHOLM FOR SHARING HIS EXPERTISE AND FOR HIS SHARP AND THOUGHTFUL FEEDBACK ABOUT THE METHODOLOGY AND CONTENTS OF THIS WORK. WE ALSO GRATEFULLY ACKNOWLEDGE OUR PARTICIPANTS FOR THEIR TIME, ATTENTION, AND CARE.
> REFERENCES

[1]  2024. AMA Future of Health: The Emerging Landscape of Augmented Intelligence in Health Care. https://www.ama-assn.org/practice-manage-ment/digital-health/ama-future-health-emerging-landscape-augmented-intelligence [2]  2025. How to develop AI policies that work for your organization’s needs. https://www.ama-assn. org/practice-management/digital-health/how-de-velop-ai-policies-work-your-organization-s-needs [3]  Boris Babic and I. Glenn Cohen. 2023. The Algorithmic Explainability ’Bait and Switch’. 4541487 (2023). https://papers.ssrn.com/ab-stract=4541487 [4]  Kimberly Chew, Colleen Pert, and Kathleen Sny-der. 2025. Navigating Liability in Virtual Care: Risk Management Strategies for Physicians in a Rapidly Evolving Landscape. Missouri Medicine 122, 6 (2025), 466–472. https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih. gov/articles/PMC12721841/ [5]  Avishek Choudhury and Onur Asan. 2022. Impact of accountability, training, and human factors on 

the use of artificial intelligence in healthcare: Ex -ploring the perceptions of healthcare practitioners in the US. Human Factors in Healthcare 2 (2022), 100021. doi:10.1016/j.hfh.2022.100021 [6]  Kirsten K. Davis. 2013. ’The Reports of My Death are Greatly Exaggerated’: Reading and Writing Objective Legal Memoranda in a Mobile Computing Age. doi:10.2139/ssrn.2281252 [7]  Robert Field. 2017. Regulation of Health Care in the United States: Complexity, Confrontation and Compromise. https://papers.ssrn.com/ab-stract=3699036 [8]  Lukasz Gorski and Shashishekar Ramakrishna. 

2021. Explainable artificial intelligence, lawyer’s 

perspective. In Proceedings of the Eighteenth In-

ternational Conference on Artificial Intelligence 

and Law (New York, NY, USA) (ICAIL ’21). Association for Computing Machinery, 60–68. doi:10.1145/3462757.3466145 [9]  Helena Haapio. 2014. Lawyers as Designers, En-gineers and Innovators: Better Legal Documents Through Information Design and Visualization. In Proceedings of the 17th International Legal Informatics Symposium IRIS 2014 (Rochester, NY). https://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=2651066 [10]  Margaret Hagan. 2020. Legal Design as a Thing: A Theory of Change and a Set of Methods to Craft a Human-Centered Legal System. 36, 3 (2020), 3–15. doi:10.1162/desi_a_00600 [11]  Aishali Hegde. 2011. Case study — Risk man-agement for medical devices (based on ISO 14971). In 2011 Proceedings - Annual Reli-ability and Maintainability Symposium. 1–6. doi:10.1109/RAMS.2011.5754492 ISSN: 0149-144X. [12]  Angela Jin and Niloufar Salehi. 2024. (Beyond) Reasonable Doubt: Challenges that Public Defenders Face in Scrutinizing AI in Court. In Proceedings of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Honolulu, HI, USA) (CHI ’24). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 467, 19 pages. doi:10.1145/3613904.3641902 [13]  Matthew P. Keris. 2020. Artificial intelligence in 

medicine creates real risk management and litiga-tion issues. Journal of Healthcare Risk Manage-ment: The Journal of the American Society for Healthcare Risk Management 40, 2 (Oct. 2020), 21–26. doi:10.1002/jhrm.21445 [14]  Thomas Maddox, Dianne Babski, Peter Embi, Jackie Gerhart, Jennifer Goldsack, Ravi Parikh, Troy Sarich, Sunita Krishnan, and Audrey Elliott. 

2025. Generative Artificial Intelligence in Health 

and Medicine: Opportunities and Responsibilities for Transformative Innovation. National Acad-emies Press. doi:10.17226/28907 [15]  Anonymized for submission. [16]  Gennie Mansi and Mark O. Riedl. 2024. Recog-nizing Lawyers as AI Creators and Intermediar-ies in Contestability. In Proceedings of the 2024 Workshop From Stem to Stern: Contestability Along AI Value Chains” at the Conference for Computer Supported Collaborative Work. https:// arxiv.org/abs/2409.17626 [17]  Michelle M. Mello, Amitabh Chandra, Atul A. Gawande, and David M. Studdert. 2010. National Costs Of The Medical Liability System. Health affairs (Project Hope) 29, 9 (Sept. 2010), 1569– 1577. doi:10.1377/hlthaff.2009.0807 [18]  Michelle M. Mello and Neel Guha. 2024. Under-standing Liability Risk from Using Health Care 

Artificial Intelligence Tools. The New England 

Journal of Medicine 390, 3 (Jan. 2024), 271–278. doi:10.1056/NEJMhle2308901 [19]  Stefania Passera and Helena Haapio. 2013. Transforming contracts from legal rules to user-centered communication tools: a human-infor-mation interaction challenge. 1, 3 (2013), 38–45. doi:10.1145/2466489.2466498 Place: New York, NY, USA. [20]  Tuan Pham. 2025. Ethical and legal consider-ations in healthcare AI: innovation and policy for safe and fair use. Royal Society Open Science 12, 5 (2025), 241873. doi:10.1098/rsos.241873 [21]  W. Nicholson Price, Sara Gerke, and I. Glenn Cohen. 2019. Potential Liability for Physicians 

Using Artificial Intelligence. 322, 18 (2019), 

1765–1766. doi:10.1001/jama.2019.15064 [22]  Suzanne E. Rowe. 1999. Legal Research, Legal Writing, and Legal Analysis: Putting Law School into Practice Maximizing the Law School Experi-ence II. Stetson Law Review 29, 4 (1999), 1193– 1216. https://heinonline.org/HOL/P?h=hein. journals/stet29&i=1210 [23]  Simon P. Rowland, J. Edward Fitzgerald, Mat-thew Lungren, Elizabeth (Hsieh) Lee, Zach Harned, and Alison H. McGregor. 2022. Digital 

health technology-specific risks for medical mal -practice liability. npj Digital Medicine 5, 1 (Oct. 2022), 157. doi:10.1038/s41746-022-00698-3 [24]  David M. Studdert, Michelle M. Mello, Atul A. Gawande, Tejal K. Gandhi, Allen Kachalia, Cath-erine Yoon, Ann Louise Puopolo, and Troyen A. Brennan. 2006. Claims, Errors, and Compensa-tion Payments in Medical Malpractice Litigation. New England Journal of Medicine 354, 19 (May 2006), 2024–2033. doi:10.1056/NEJMsa054479 Publisher: Massachusetts Medical Society [25]  Hannah R. Sullivan and Scott J. Schweikart. 2019. Are Current Tort Liability Doctrines Ade-quate for Addressing Injury Caused by AI? AMA Journal of Ethics 21, 2 (Feb. 2019), 160–166. doi:10.1001/amajethics.2019.160 [26]  Benjamin Sundholm. 2024. Navigating the Fron-tiers of MedTech. Arizona State Law Journal 56, 3 (2024), 1403–1470. [27]  Marisol Wong-Villacres, Aakash Gautam, Debo-

rah Tatar, and Betsy DiSalvo. 2021. Reflections 

on Assets-Based Design: A Journey Towards A Collective of Assets-Based Thinkers. Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact. 5, CSCW2, Article 401 (Oct. 2021), 32 pages. doi:10.1145/3479545