Title: Strategic Algorithmic Monoculture:Experimental Evidence from Coordination Games

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.09502v1

Published Time: Mon, 13 Apr 2026 01:13:16 GMT

Number of Pages: 59

Markdown Content:
# Strategic Algorithmic Monoculture: Experimental Evidence from Coordination Games 

Gonzalo Ballestero Hadi Hosseini Samarth Khanna Ran I. Shorrer *

April 2026 

Abstract 

AI agents increasingly operate in multi-agent environments where outcomes depend on co-ordination. We distinguish primary algorithmic monoculture —baseline action similarity—from 

strategic algorithmic monoculture , whereby agents adjust similarity in response to incentives. We implement a simple experimental design that cleanly separates these forces, and deploy it on human and large language model (LLM) subjects. LLMs exhibit high levels of baseline sim-ilarity (primary monoculture) and, like humans, they regulate it in response to coordination incentives (strategic monoculture). While LLMs coordinate extremely well on similar actions, they lag behind humans in sustaining heterogeneity when divergence is rewarded. 

> *

We are grateful to Vincent Crawford, Nikhil Garg, Yannai Gonczarowski, and Alex Imas for helpful comments. Ballestero: Department of Economics, Pennsylvania State University (email: gballestero@psu.edu); Hosseini: Depart-ment of Informatics and Intelligent Systems, Pennsylvania State University (email: hadi@psu.edu); Khanna: Depart-ment of Informatics and Intelligent Systems, Pennsylvania State University (email: samarth.khanna@psu.edu); Shorrer: Department of Economics, Pennsylvania State University (email: shorrer@psu.edu). Funding from the College of IST (seed grant) is gratefully acknowledged. Hosseini acknowledges support from the National Science Foundation (NSF) through CAREER Award IIS-2144413 and Award IIS-2107173. Shorrer’s research was supported by a grant from the United States–Israel Binational Science Foundation (BSF grant 2022417). This study was ruled exempt from IRB review by the Pennsylvania State University IRB (Study ID: STUDY00027715). 

1

> arXiv:2604.09502v1 [cs.AI] 10 Apr 2026

## 1 Introduction 

Coordination is central to economic and social systems, but the socially desirable form of coordi-nation depends on the environment. In some settings, agents must coordinate on the same action to avoid costly misalignment or to benefit from network effects. In other settings, agents benefit from taking different actions because congestion, redundancy, or correlated errors can undermine performance. Many economic situations feature this latter logic. When employers or colleges screen candidates using similar noisy signals, “everyone hiring the same way” can amplify mis-takes and reduce the quality of selection. When investors or households rely on common noisy signals, asset prices might become less informative, leading to distortions in consumption and labor supply decisions. 1 In these cases, society benefits not from similarity of actions, but from 

coordinated divergence .Algorithmic agents, and in particular AI agents, are increasingly embedded in the economy. Individuals and firms rely on them in high-stakes decisions, including ones where coordination is highly consequential, like hiring, pricing, and trading. 2 Modern AI agents, especially ones based on large language models (LLMs), are a completely new class of economic agents. Their growing role in society brings back to the forefront an old question— how do agents coordinate? 

There are reasons to expect that AI agents may excel in coordination tasks that require converg-ing on the same action. First, many of these agents rely on LLMs that were trained on a similar corpus of data and share many design features. In some instances, they even rely on the exact same LLM with only minimal adaptations. Second, there is evidence that LLMs indeed provide similar responses across many domains, even when they are not “incentivized” to do so. 3 Third, LLMs can quickly ingest large amounts of information and, therefore, may be better than humans at identifying focal points, and their similarity may lead them to have a natural focal point in more scenarios. 4 These features raise the possibility that LLM agents will act as unusually effective con-vergence coordinators. At the same time, these same forces may limit their effectiveness where divergence is valuable. And, as we explain below, this concern is compounded by LLM agents’ difficulty to randomize. 5

This paper asks two simple questions with broad implications. How do LLM agents coordinate, and how do they compare with humans? To address these questions, we introduce a new perspective on algorithmic monoculture (Kleinberg and Raghavan, 2021), building on ideas from the extensive 

> 1See, e.g., Ali et al. (2026), Kleinberg and Raghavan (2021), and Peng and Garg (2024) on matching and Hassan and Mertens (2011), and Hassan and Mertens (2017) on trading. In some circumstances, coordination may be harmful to others. For example, because coordination may facilitate collusion (e.g Assad et al., 2024; Calvano et al., 2020b,a).
> 2See, e.g., Cheng et al. (2025), Fish et al. (2024), and Society for Human Resource Management (2025).
> 3For example, Kim et al. (2025) show LLMs are highly correlated conditional on providing an erroneous answer. Wenger and Kenett (2025) and Jiang et al. (2025) show that LLMs often display homogenization in open-ended genera-tion, producing highly similar responses across independent samples both within and between models.
> 4See Sugden (1995).
> 5See Van Koevering and Kleinberg (2024).

2literature on coordination, especially Schelling (1960). 6 Mehta et al. (1994) synthesize the literature and identify several channels that support coordination on the same action (by humans). These include primary salience where agents display the tendency to provide the same answers absent incentives to do so, secondary salience where agents rely on higher-order beliefs about salience, and 

Schelling salience where agents identify unique focal choices (e.g., the Eiffel Tower as a meeting spot in Paris). 7 Analogously, we classify algorithmic monoculture into primary algorithmic monoculture ,and strategic monoculture (which includes secondary monoculture and Schelling monoculture ). We conduct experiments with LLM and human subjects. 8 Building on Mehta et al. (1994), in our main experiment, subjects are asked to provide a valid answer to an open-ended question (e.g., to name a letter in the English alphabet, a city in the world, etc.). Subjects are assigned to one of three treatments: picking in which they are only incentivized to choose a valid answer, 

coordination in which they are incentivized to choose the same valid answer as another agent of the same type (human or LLM), and divergence in which they are incentivized to choose a valid answer that is different from that of another agent of the same type. Our measure of performance is the agreement rate , defined as the probability that two independent agents provide the same answer. 9 This design allows us (i) to isolate the role of strategic incentives (strategic algorithmic monoculture, or secondary and Schelling salience) from baseline correlation (primary algorithmic monoculture or primary salience), and (ii) to compare the behavior of LLM and human subjects. Our main experiment reveals that LLMs display strategic monoculture. It also uncovers a sharp asymmetry between tasks (coordination vs. divergence) and subject types (LLM vs. human): Relative to humans, LLM subjects are exceptionally strong at “finding each other” on a common focal response, but comparatively weak at “staying out of each other’s way” when divergence is rewarded. Figure 1 depicts some of these results, which we discuss below. First, LLM subjects’ choices are more correlated than those of humans in the absence of incentives . When comparing the performance of LLM subjects to human subjects in the picking arm, where there is no incentive to match or mismatch, each of the 16 LLMs we evaluate is substantially more likely to provide the same answer as another independent instance of the same LLM. These findings indicate elevated levels of primary algorithmic monoculture. Second, both human and LLM subjects respond to strategic coordination incentives . Specifically,  

> 6Other examples include Camerer et al. (2004), Cooper (1999), Crawford et al. (2013), and Sugden (1995).
> 7A prominent example of secondary salience is Keynes’s (1936) “beauty contest,” in which participants are asked to rank the prettiest faces out of large set of pictures, with the winner being the participant whose choice is closest to some well-defined average. Keynes posits that “[w]e have reached the third degree where we devote our intelligences to anticipating what average opinion expects the average opinion to be. And there are some, I believe, who practice the fourth, fifth, and higher degrees.” Namely, Keynes hypothesizes that third, fourth, and fifth order salience will play a role in determining the outcome of the game. The distinction between secondary salience and Schelling salience is that the latter does not necessarily relate to (higher-order) beliefs about primary salience.
> 8We use AI subjects to assess their capabilities and tendencies. By contrast, Horton (2023) and Manning et al. (2024) consider using AI subjects to learn about human behavior.
> 9The literature often refers to the agreement rate as the coordination index . We refrain from using this label, as it is a misnomer in the context of coordinated divergence.

3Figure 1: Agreement rate by subject type and treatment 

> Notes: Bars report average agreement rate across question topics for human and LLM subjects by treatment. LLM agreement rates are the average over all LLMs when facing the same model. The black cross-shaped markers indicate the median.

agreement rates rise in the coordination arm in which matching actions are rewarded, and fall in the divergence arm in which they are penalized. This replicates the finding of Mehta et al. (1994) that humans coordinate through secondary and Schelling salience, and shows that LLM subjects can similarly coordinate via strategic monoculture. Third, LLM subjects substantially outperform humans in coordinating on the same action, but per-form substantially worse in coordinated divergence. When LLMs play against independent copies of themselves, their average agreement rate in the coordination arm is 72 percent, far higher than the 31 percent among human subjects. By contrast, in the divergence arm—where high agreement is undesirable—LLM subjects agree far more often than human subjects, especially when playing a copy of themselves (27 percent vs. 3.5 percent). Finally, all of the abovementioned results continue to hold—but at a smaller magnitude—even when we consider pairs of different LLMs .We provide additional evidence of strategic algorithmic monoculture, leveraging the unique features of AI subjects. Specifically, unlike humans, LLM subjects offer a window into their think-ing process in the form of textual reasoning. Using a large-scale text analysis of models’ textual reasoning, we show that LLM subjects explicitly recognize the role of (secondary and Schelling) salience in coordination tasks and the need to choose obscure options in divergence tasks. These patterns indicate that LLM subjects often articulate the correct strategic logic, even in the diver-gence arm, where their performance lags behind. We also probe the mechanisms through which LLM subjects coordinate. This analysis is guided 4by our taxonomy of primary versus strategic monoculture and two simple theoretical observations (see Section 2). First, in symmetric environments without communication, like the ones studied in our experiment, coordinated divergence is easy to achieve so long as agents are (i) sufficiently heterogeneous or (ii) able to reliably randomize. Second, if two agents tend to give the same response to similar questions, they can trivially coordinate on the same action successfully. Our theoretical analysis points to a potential tradeoff: While homogeneity is an asset for coordination on the same action, it can be a liability for coordinated divergence. This tradeoff and the relation to randomization capabilities offer a new lens for evaluating algorithmic monoculture. Consistent with the theoretical predictions that homogeneity contributes to performance in the coordination arm but hurts performance in the divergence arm, we find that using different LLMs reduces agreement rates across arms. (This pattern also obtains when we endow LLM subjects with personas based on characteristics of our human subjects, as in Mei et al., 2024). Furthermore, higher agreement rates in the picking arm are correlated with higher agreement rates in the coordination and divergence arms. In other words, primary monoculture is indicative of behavior in the presence of strategic incentives. We conduct several additional analyses to investigate the role of LMM capabilities. First, we rule out the possibility that LLMs’ poor performance results from access to a limited pool of valid answers. Second, we show that it does not fully result from LLMs’ limited capacity to random-ize. Specifically, when instructed to generate a large list of valid answers and then to choose one randomly, LLMs improve their performance in the divergence arm. Additionally, we replicate our main experiment using higher and lower temperatures . (The temperature is a parameter that modulates the stochasticity of LLM-generated text.) Our temperature manipulation confirms the theoretical prediction regarding the role of randomization in the divergence arm, but also reveals a tradeoff with respect to performance in the coordination and divergence arms: higher tem-perature lowers agreement rates across all arms, improving performance in the divergence arm, while harming performance in the coordination arm; lower temperature does the opposite. No-tably, even in extreme temperature settings, the qualitative ordering persists: LLM subjects remain stronger than human subjects in the coordination arm, while human subjects remain stronger than LLM subjects in the divergence arm. Thus, the divergence deficit cannot be fully resolved merely by “turning up the heat.” Information about the identity of the co-player may be crucial for coordination through strate-gic monoculture, which requires reasoning about how the other player might choose and reason. Information can also help diverge by providing group identity (Heath et al., 2006). To investigate the role of this channel, we vary the information LLM subjects receive about the identity of the other subject by mentioning in their instructions that they are facing an identical copy or “another person.” Our information manipulations have a sizable effect on LLM subjects’ textual reasoning about the identity of the co-player. Despite this fact, they have little effect on outcomes on average. 5Organization of the paper. The remainder of this section reviews the related literature. Section 2 presents our simple theoretical framework. Section 3 reviews the design of the main experiment. Section 4 presents its results. Section 5 presents analyses of the textual reasoning produced by LLM subjects. Section 6 presents the design of the supplemental experiments and their results. Section 7 concludes. 

1.1 Related Literature 

Our paper is related to several strands of the literature. First, it is related to the well-established literature on coordination (Schelling, 1960; Sugden, 1995), and especially to experimental studies (e.g. Bardsley et al., 2010; Crawford et al., 2008; Isoni et al., 2014). The most closely related paper in this literature is Mehta et al. (1994), whose experimental design inspires our design. We add to Mehta et al. (1994) by introducing coordinated divergence games, and more importantly, by studying LLM subjects. We further contribute to the literature by providing evidence on LLM subjects’ reasoning, rather than relying exclusively on choices, overcoming a common limitation in human subject studies (Ericsson and Simon, 1998; Rangel et al., 2008). Our paper is also related to the literature on homogenization, particularly algorithmic mono-culture (Kleinberg and Raghavan, 2021). Theoretical studies in this literature show that relying on correlated signals or on similar algorithms can lead to detrimental aggregate outcomes across a range of domains, including collective decision-making (Page, 2008), hiring and recruiting (Ali et al., 2026; Kleinberg and Raghavan, 2021; Peng and Garg, 2024), and financial markets (Hassan and Mertens, 2011, 2017). Cao et al. (2026) presents field evidence of algorithmic monoculture emerging in the cryptocurrencies market due to access to generative AI. Empirical studies of algo-rithmic monoculture focused mainly on primary monoculture (Jiang et al., 2025; Kim et al., 2025; Wenger and Kenett, 2025; Zhang et al., 2025). 10 We contribute to this literature by introducing the taxonomy of primary versus strategic monoculture, and by conducting experiments that allow us to separately identify strategic monoculture. Our findings also speak to a broader concern regarding multi-agent system alignment (Bom-masani et al., 2021; Brynjolfsson et al., 2024; Hammond et al., 2025). They suggest that the very forces that make LLM agents powerful coordinators also create systemic fragility in environments where diversity of actions is socially valuable. Finally, our paper is related to the growing literature that analyzes AI agents by adopting tools from game theory (e.g. Conitzer and Oesterheld, 2023; Iakovlev and Liang, 2025; Liang, 2026) and behavioral science (e.g. Jackson et al., 2025), and by expanding these toolkits with specialized ap-proaches tailored to AI agents. For example, Fish et al. (2024) introduce new techniques to analyze LLM agents’ reasoning and to causally link reasoning to actions. Other examples of experimen-tal studies of AI agents include Akata et al. (2025), Cook et al. (2026), Fish et al. (2025), Hosseini 

> 10 Imas et al. (2025) study a bargaining setting and find no evidence of increased homogenization in AI-mediated interactions relative to human interactions.

6and Khanna (2025), Meta FAIR Diplomacy Team et al. (2022), Ross et al. (2024) and Werner et al. (2024). Like our study, Araujo and Uhlig (2026) vary the information LLM subjects receive about the humanity of the co-player. Imas et al. (2025) and Mei et al. (2024) also compare LLM and human subjects in strategic environments. 11 Dreyfuss and Raux (2024), He et al. (2025), and Vafa et al. (2024) compare LLM and human decisions, but their focus is on human beliefs about LLM choices. Gao et al. (2026) consider LLMs’ ability to predict human behavior. 

## 2 Theoretical Framework 

We concentrate on two simple classes of games: two-player pure coordination games and two-player pure coordinated divergence games . Using standard game-theoretic formalism, the normal form of these games can be described as follows. There are two players labeled 1 and 2. Player 1 must choose an action from the set A1 = {a11 , a12 , . . . , a1n}, where n > 1. Similarly, player 2 must choose an action from the set A2 = {a21 , a22 , . . . , a2n}. In a coordination game, given a profile of actions, 

(a1i, a2j), both players get a payoff of 1 if i = j and zero otherwise. In a coordinated divergence game, both players get a payoff of 1 if i̸ = j and zero otherwise. Figure 2 presents an example of the matrix normal form of such games with n = 5. 

> Figure 2: Matrix form examples
> (a) Coordination

A B C D EA (1, 1 ) (0, 0 ) (0, 0 ) (0, 0 ) (0, 0 )

B (0, 0 ) (1, 1 ) (0, 0 ) (0, 0 ) (0, 0 )

C (0, 0 ) (0, 0 ) (1, 1 ) (0, 0 ) (0, 0 )

D (0, 0 ) (0, 0 ) (0, 0 ) (1, 1 ) (0, 0 )

E (0, 0 ) (0, 0 ) 0, 0 ) (0, 0 ) (1, 1 )

> (b) Coordinated divergence

A B C D EA (0, 0 ) (1, 1 ) (1, 1 ) (1, 1 ) (1, 1 )

B (1, 1 ) (0, 0 ) (1, 1 ) (1, 1 ) (1, 1 )

C (1, 1 ) (1, 1 ) (0, 0 ) (1, 1 ) (1, 1 )

D (1, 1 ) (1, 1 ) (1, 1 ) (0, 0 ) (1, 1 )

E (1, 1 ) (1, 1 ) (1, 1 ) (1, 1 ) (0, 0 )

We note that coordination games have n pure Nash equilibria and that coordinated divergence games have n × (n − 1) pure Nash equilibria. In both cases, players are indifferent between all these equilibria. Additionally, there are strong symmetries between players, strategies, and equi-libria. As a result, in these settings, for players to make meaningful choices (other than randomize uniformly), they must rely on labels, in contrast with the classic game-theoretic assumption that players’ choices do not depend on labels (see, e.g., Crawford and Iriberri, 2007; Harsanyi and Selten, 1988; Schelling, 1960). 

Example. Consider Schelling’s Heads or Tails coordination game . In this game, players win a reward if both of them choose heads or both choose tails, and get nothing otherwise. Schelling (1960) and Mehta et al. (1994) show that human players achieve high rates of success by choosing heads. Assuming behavior is independent of labels, the Heads or Tails game is equivalent to the game in which 

> 11 Chen et al. (2023) compare LLM and human subjects in single-agent decision problems.

7players are incentivized to choose different sides of the coin. But, in reality, since players are symmetric, unless they have a sophisticated way to rely on their names or other asymmetric cues, there is no way for them to coordinate. 

This discussion explains our modeling choice of following the coordination literature (e.g., Mehta et al., 1994; Sugden, 1995) and assuming that strategies share the same labels and that this fact is commonly known to both players. We denote A1 = A2 = A.

Definition 1. A strategy (for player i) is a distribution over actions in A i. A strategy is neutral if it is independent of the relabeling of strategies. A strategy profile is anonymous if it is independent of player labels. 

Proposition 1. The uniform distribution over A is the unique neutral anonymous strategy profile in coor-dination and coordinated divergence games. 

Proposition 2. In coordination games, using uniform randomization, each player can guarantee an ex-pected payoff of 1 

> n

independently of the others’ actions. Furthermore, this is the highest expected payoff that an agent can guarantee. 

Proposition 3. In coordinated divergence games, using uniform randomization, each player can guarantee an expected payoff of n−1 

> n

independently of the actions of others. Furthermore, this is the highest expected payoff that an agent can guarantee. Proof of Propositions 2 and 3. For the lower bound, observe that by randomizing uniformly over Ai,player i is guaranteed to match the action of the other player, −i, with probability 1/ n. To see that this bound is tight, observe that if player −i randomizes uniformly over A−i, each action of player 

i matches the action of player −i with probability 1/ n.Propositions 1 to 3 show that, from a classic game-theoretic standpoint, when there are more than two actions, coordinated divergence games are more attractive for players than coordination games: they yield higher payoffs in the neutral anonymous equilibrium and allow players to guarantee higher (minimax) payoffs. We now introduce algorithmic players. An algorithmic player is a mapping A : M → ∆(A)

from the set of (valid) inputs M to a distribution over actions ∆(A). Note that, in this definition, we prioritize simplicity of notation and eliminate the need to specify the problem details (i.e., A is hard-coded into the definition). 12 

Definition 2. Given two algorithm-input pairs (A, m) and (A′, m′), the agreement rate between (A, m)

and (A′, m′) is the probability with which A(m) = A′(m′), which is given by A(m) · A ′(m′).13 The 

self-agreement rate of (A, m) is the agreement rate of (A, m) and (A, m).  

> 12 By avoiding the broader definition—which may better fit reality—we avoid the need for statements that accommo-date agents behaving quite differently in different contexts.
> 13 The symbol ·denotes the inner product.

8The agreement rate is a measure of algorithmic monoculture (Kleinberg and Raghavan, 2021). In our experiment, we will use its empirical counterpart to evaluate subjects’ performance. 

Proposition 4. When algorithmic players play a coordination (coordinated divergence) game, the payoffs they generate are equal to (1 minus) their agreement rate. 

Corollary 1. If two users deploy 1) the same algorithm, 2) with the same message, and 3) the algorithm is deterministic, then they will receive the lowest possible payoff in coordinated divergence games and the highest possible payoff in coordination games. 

Summary. Taken together, our theoretical analysis finds that heterogeneity and randomization play a crucial role in coordinated divergence. With randomization (directly by the algorithm, or through randomized messages), a high success rate can be achieved, even when facing an ad-versary. Without randomization, such success relies on algorithmic players’ being sufficiently different. Algorithm-instruction pairs that yield similar results frequently are bound to fail in co-ordinated divergence games. The opposite conclusions hold with respect to coordination games. 

## 3 Experimental Design 

We adapt the experimental design of Mehta et al. (1994) to study coordination among AI and human subjects. The main deviations we make from their design are that 1) in addition to their picking and coordination treatment arms, we add a divergence arm, and 2) we study LLM sub-jects, not just humans. 14 

Treatment arms. The main experiment consists of three treatment arms. In each of the arms, subjects (human or AI) are asked to provide an answer to 12 open-ended questions like “please name a city in the world” or “please name a color." 15 In the picking arm, subjects are instructed to provide a valid answer. In the coordination arm, subjects are instructed to provide a valid answer that matches that of another randomly selected subject. And in the divergence arm, subjects are instructed to provide a valid answer that differs from that of another randomly selected subject. Importantly, treatment arms differ only in strategic incentives. This experimental design allows us to isolate the effects of strategic incentives (i.e., strategic monoculture for LLMs or secondary and Schelling salience for humans). 

Incentives. Human subjects receive a participation fee of $1. Additionally, they are informed that they may get a bonus payment of $1 that will be determined by their choices (and those of  

> 14 Importantly, our specific tasks and instructions are different from theirs.
> 15 Question topics include: professional athlete, car manufacturer, city in the world, color, disease, flower, food item, geometric shape, letter of the English alphabet, month, positive number, and character trait. The use of open-ended questions removes the possibility that one of the valid responses will be more salient due to the way we communicate the question to the subjects. For example, it is well known that LLMs find options that appear earlier more salient (Eicher and Irgolic, 2024; Guo et al., 2025; Pezeshkpour and Hruschka, 2024).

9Figure 3: LLM textual instructions 

Picking 

Please name any city in the world . Please return your selection in the following format: ‘<answer>selected city</answer>’ 

Coordination 

Your task is to choose the name of any city in the world .At the same time, another LLM will also select the name of any city in the world . You will receive a reward only if both of you select the same 

name. If your choices differ ,you receive nothing. Think thoroughly before you an-swer. Please return your selection in the following format: ‘<answer>selected city</answer>’ 

Divergence 

Your task is to choose the name of any city in the world .At the same time, another LLM will also select the name of any city in the world . You will receive a reward only if both of you select differ-ent names. If your choices 

match , you receive nothing. Think thoroughly before you answer. Please return your selection in the following format: ‘<answer>selected city</answer>’ 

Notes: Italicized and boldface text are inserted to highlight differences between treatments and rounds. They did not appear in the textual instructions. Italicized text is replaced between rounds (questions). Boldface text highlights differences between the coordination and divergence arms. 

their randomly selected partner) in a randomly selected round. 16 The complete instructions and representative screenshots are available in Section D. LLM subjects are not provided with explicit monetary incentives (as they were trained to follow instructions). Their textual instructions follow the template presented in Figure 3. 

Deployment (human subjects). We recruited 301 human subjects using Prolific on November 24th, 2025. To qualify for the study, participants were required to be located in the USA, be fluent in English, and have an approval rate of at least 98%. 17 Participants were randomly assigned to one (and only one) of the three treatments. Table A.1 shows that human subjects’ demographic characteristics were balanced across treatment arms. Human subjects completed the experiment through a Qualtrics survey. Each subject answered all 12 questions for their assigned treatment in the same session. The order of questions was drawn uniformly and independently at random. Before answering the questions, participants received detailed instructions, and they were required to pass a comprehension quiz. Section D.1 presents screenshots of the instructions shown to participants in each treatment, along with an example question. The median completion time of the study was about 4 minutes. We take a series of measures to minimize LLM usage by human subjects, as advocated by Rilla et al. (2025). Specifically, we 1) use CAPTCHA, 2) disable copying and pasting, 3) disable right-clicking, 4) implement a pop-up alert if the subject switches tabs, 5) embed hidden instructions in the interface, and 6) keep track of tab switching. The majority of participants did not switch tabs,   

> 16 In the picking arm, subjects needed to provide only valid answers for a 50% chance of receiving the bonus.
> 17 We chose to focus on a homogeneous subject pool since culture may be crucial for coordination (Schelling, 1960).

10 but many switched once, plausibly to copy their Prolific ID (see Figure B.1). 

Deployment (LLM subjects). We assess a suite of 16 open- and closed-source LLMs, spanning multiple providers and architectural families. The 16 models differ in size and reasoning capabil-ities (see Table A.2 for details). To ensure comparability, each model was queried using its default or recommended temperature setting. For each treatment arm, we queried each model 50 times for each question topic (yielding a total of 3 × 16 × 50 × 12 = 28, 800 LLM responses). Responses were sampled independently with no shared context or memory across queries. Data was collected in November 2025. Models were asked to return their selections in a specific format. However, they sometimes deviated from the format. To process these responses, we use Gemini-2.5-Flash to interpret the selection (Section C.1 provides the textual instructions). If Gemini-2.5-Flash cannot interpret a response, it is excluded from the analysis. 18 

Response standardization. To evaluate the validity of responses and whether or not they agree, we bring answers to a common form. To do so, we first remove diacritics and special characters and convert the text to lowercase letters. We then manually correct spelling mistakes. Finally, we use GPT-5 to standardize responses to a common form, including converting adjectives to their corresponding noun forms, reconciling plural and singular variants, and consolidating alternative names, acronyms, or variants referring to the same underlying concept (Charness et al., 2023; Korinek, 2023). We execute this process separately for human and LLM subjects. 

Evaluation metric. Following Mehta et al. (1994), the primary metric we use to measure similarity 

of responses is the empirical agreement rate . As its name suggests, the empirical agreement rate is the empirical counterpart of the agreement rate (Definition 2 in Section 2). As noted in the introduction, Mehta et al. (1994) call this measure the coordination index . We refrain from using this label as it is a misnomer in the context of coordinated divergence. The empirical agreement rate in a pair of populations (for a specific task) is equal to the fre-quency with which a random pair of members of these populations provides the same answer. For groups i and j, let Ni and Nj denote the total number of responses elicited from each group, 

r ∈ { 1, 2, . . . , R} denote the set of valid responses, and mir and mjr denote the number of occur-rences of response r in the corresponding group. Then, the empirical agreement rate is given by the formula 19 

Aij :=

> R

# ∑

> r=1

mir

Ni

× mjr − 1i=j

Nj − 1i=j

. (1)      

> 18 Approximately 4 percent of responses are out of format. After applying the LLM-based interpretation procedure described above, the fraction of excluded responses falls to about 2 percent. Table B.1 reports the number of out-of-format and excluded responses by model.
> 19 The indicator term 1i=jequals one when we are evaluating self-agreement (i.e., when i=j). It reflects the require-ment to draw a random pair (without replacement).

11 Preregistration. We preregistered our main hypotheses, our primary analyses, and the sample inclusion criteria and target size. Our preregistration is archived on aspredicted.org and included in Section F for convenience. 20 

## 4 Results 

We begin by reviewing Figure 1, which compares the average (over all 12 topics) agreement rates for human and LLM subjects by treatment. 21 For LLM subjects, we report the average (across all models) self-agreement rate (i.e., when the LLM plays against an independent copy of itself). The figure reveals several results. First, LLM subjects exhibit substantially higher agreement rates relative to human subjects in the picking arm, which provides no incentives to coordinate (14% in humans and 58 % in LLMs). This finding indicates elevated levels of primary algorithmic monoculture among LLM subjects (relative to primary salience in humans). Second, both human and LLM subjects respond to strategic coordination incentives. Specif-ically, compared to the picking treatment, agreement rates are higher in the coordination treat-ment, which incentivizes subjects to match their responses (31% vs 14% in humans, 72% vs 58% in LLMs). The human-subject findings therefore corroborate the finding of Mehta et al. (1994) on humans coordinating through secondary salience or Schelling salience (not just primary salience). Analogously, the LLM-subject findings indicate coordination through strategic monoculture. 22 We also find that agreement rates are lower in the divergence treatment, which incentivizes subjects to differ in their responses, compared to the picking treatment (4% vs 14% in humans, 27% vs 58% in LLMs). Third, LLM subjects excel in the coordination arm relative to humans (72% agreement rate relative to 31% in humans). Additionally, we find that LLM subjects lag behind human subjects in the divergence arm (27% agreement rate relative to 4% in humans). Figure 1 averages the results over all 16 LLMs we study. In Table 1, we present the agreement rates by model. The table reveals that most models respond to incentives and that LLM self-agreement rates are higher than human agreement rates across all models and treatments. All differences are statistically significant ( p < 0.05 using two-sided Welch’s t-test), with the exception of DeepSeek-8B in the coordination treatment. 

> 20 Although we preregistered using 15 LLMs, we accidentally collected data for an additional LLM. We decided to report all of the results. None of our findings is sensitive to the exclusion of any LLM.
> 21 Figure B.3 reports agreement rates for each topic separately.
> 22 Although our experiment was not designed to discern the types of strategic monoculture, the choice data indicate that Schelling salience plays a role. For example, Table A.3—which reports the most common responses by treatment, topic, and subject type—reveals that the number 1 was the fourth most common LLM choice in the picking arm (with 5.8% of the responses) is the most common choice in the coordination arm (with 78.8% of responses). Similarly, the letter “e,” the most common letter in English language texts, accounts for 50.1% of responses in the coordination arm, despite being the fifth most popular LLM response in the picking arm. See also Figure B.2, which shows many instances in which the modal response of a specific model differs from the picking arm.

12 Table 1: Average agreement rates and number of different answers by treatment 

Picking Coordination Divergence Subject type Agree. rate Answers Agree. rate Answers Agree. rate Answers Human 0.14 31.75 0.31 11.33 0.04 19.50 Claude-3.5H 0.71 3.58 0.66 3.75 0.28 10.00 Claude-4S 0.89 1.58 0.79 2.08 0.26 10.83 DeepSeek-R1 0.65 3.00 0.75 2.00 0.11 19.00 DeepSeek-70B 0.37 7.00 0.74 2.75 0.21 12.00 DeepSeek-8B 0.27 12.42 0.39 8.75 0.12 17.92 DeepSeek-14B 0.35 9.42 0.66 3.50 0.19 15.08 Gemini-2.0F 0.66 3.25 0.75 2.50 0.42 7.50 Gemini-2.5P 0.61 4.50 0.85 1.92 0.12 18.00 Gemma3-27B 0.92 1.42 0.92 1.17 0.93 1.67 GPT-4o 0.54 4.58 0.74 2.42 0.39 7.25 Llama-3.3 0.68 3.50 0.81 1.92 0.32 12.00 o4-mini 0.57 3.92 0.77 2.50 0.14 23.58 Phi-4 0.69 2.83 0.65 3.25 0.28 10.58 Phi-4(R) 0.59 3.42 0.74 2.42 0.24 12.92 Qwen3-14B 0.45 5.33 0.70 3.08 0.23 12.75 Qwen3-32B 0.37 6.75 0.65 3.42 0.12 19.25 

> Notes: The table reports the average agreement rate and number of distinct answers across tasks for human and LLM subjects by treatment. For LLM subjects, we report the self-agreement rate. To ensure comparability between humans and LLM subjects (that were queried 50 times), we randomly subsample 50 human responses per treatment and calculate the average number of different responses.

Table 1 also reveals that LLM choices are substantially more homogeneous relative to human choices across all treatments. Specifically, in both the picking and the coordination arms, the average number of different choices is significantly lower for LLM subjects, suggesting that some options are considerably more salient for LLM agents as compared to humans. Interestingly, the table also reveals that the gap narrows down substantially in the divergence arm, and that some of the best performing models in this treatment arm essentially eliminate the gap. Figure A.1 reports the average agreement rate among reasoning and non-reasoning models. 23 

We find that reasoning models have lower agreement rates in the picking arm ( p < 0.05 using Welch’s t-test), that their performance in coordination tasks is comparable to non-reasoning mod-els, and that they do better at divergence tasks ( p < 0.05 using Welch’s t-test). To assess the role of LLM subjects facing exact copies of each other, we explore the perfor-mance of LLM subjects when facing a different LLM. Figure 4 shows the average (over all 12 topics) agreement rate for each pair of models by treatment condition (the diagonal corresponds to the self-agreement rates from Table 1). We find that the higher agreement rates among LLMs 

> 23 Reasoning models break tasks into steps and write down their logic using a variety of approaches (e.g., chain of thought or tree of thought reasoning). These models excel in many domains, including math and logic (Li et al., 2025).

13 Figure 4: Pairwise agreement rates by treatment 

> Notes: The figure displays a heatmap of pairwise agreement rates for all pairs of LLM subjects. Diagonal cells correspond to self-agreement rates (reported in Table 1). Lighter (yellow) colors indicate higher agreement and darker (blue) colors indicate lower agreement.

persist even when models are paired with different LLM subjects rather than an identical copy of themselves. The average agreement rate between a pair of LLMs is 37 percent in the picking treatment. This indicates that primary monoculture (salience) is still substantially higher than the human benchmark of 14 percent, even when the LLM subjects are not identical copies. The aver-age agreement rate in the coordination treatment is 53 percent, still substantially higher than the 31 percent agreement rate obtained by human subjects. These findings point to coordination be-tween different LLMs through strategic monoculture. Lastly, the agreement rate in the divergence arm is 9 percent, still substantially higher than the human benchmark, but substantially lower than the self-agreement rate. Consistent with our theoretical analysis, this finding points to large benefits from breaking symmetries in coordinated divergence games. Finally, we evaluate the correlation between primary monoculture and performance in the co-ordination and divergence arms. Panel (a) of Figure 5 plots, for each pair of models, the agreement rate in the picking arm (on the x axis, corresponding to Panel (a) of Figure 4) against the agreement rate in the coordination arm (on the y axis, corresponding to Panel (b) of Figure 4). The fact that most points lie above the 45 degree line reflects the fact that the agreement rate increases in the coordination arm relative to the picking arm for almost any pair of LLMs. The figure also reveals a positive correlation between primary monoculture and the agreement rate in the coordination arm. Panel (b) of Figure 5 repeats the analysis for the divergence arm. All but one pair of models lie under the 45-degree line (reflecting reduced agreement rates in the divergence arm). Further-more, the figure reveals a positive correlation between primary monoculture and the agreement rate in the divergence arm. To summarize, Figure 5 shows that pairs of LLMs that provide sim-ilar answers in the absence of incentives tend to continue to provide similar answers both when incentivized to coordinate and when incentivized to diverge. 14 Figure 5: Primary monoculture and strategic coordination  

> Notes: Each point on a graph represents a pair of models. The x-axis reports their (average across topics) agreement rate in the picking arm, and the y-axis reports their (average across topics) agreement rates in the corresponding treatment arm. Panel (a) shows the coordination arm and panel (b) shows the divergence arm. Solid lines show the fitted ordinary least squares (OLS) regression lines, and the dashed line indicates the 45° line.

## 5 Textual Analysis 

In this section, we analyze the textual reasoning (Chain-of-Thought, or CoT for short) of LLM subjects. 24 We begin by analyzing the amount of LLM reasoning in the various treatment arms. To do this, we compare CoT length across treatment arms. In line with the difficulty to perform the task perfectly, we find that reasoning is lowest in the picking arm, and highest in the divergence arm (see Table A.4). 25 

Next, we turn to analyzing the semantic meaning of LLM reasoning. 26 We do so using two complementary methods: semantic similarity (as in Fish et al., 2024) and LLM as a judge (as in Asirvatham et al., 2026). 

5.1 Semantic Similarity 

Our semantic similarity analysis follows the methodology of Fish et al. (2024). We begin by split-ting the LLM-generated reasoning text into individual sentences. This yields a dataset of 226,083 individual sentences. As we discussed above, in contrast to Fish et al. (2024), the amount of text is 

not balanced across treatment arms (for statistics on each model and treatment, see Table A.4). After splitting into sentences, we filter for sentences containing synonyms of the terms “salient,” “obscure,” and “randomize.” (The full list of synonyms is available in Section E.1.) We note that 

> 24 Some models only provide a summary of their reasoning. We omit these models from analyses that consider the length of CoT, and otherwise we analyze the summary of the reasoning.
> 25 Interestingly, human subjects in the divergence arm also take more time to complete the experiment (see Table A.1).
> 26 Fish et al. (2024) establish a causal link between LLM “thoughts" and actions in their setting.

15 Figure 6: Distribution of screened sentences by treatment       

> Notes: The figure reports the share of screened sentences that are semantically closest (in cosine similarity) to one of six reference vec-tors: CHOOSE SALIENT ,AVOID SALIENT ,CHOOSE OBSCURE ,AVOID OBSCURE ,CHOOSE RANDOMIZE , and AVOID RAN -
> DOMIZE .

the mere mention of a term like “salient” does not indicate an intention to choose a salient ac-tion. For example, the agent may be planning to avoid the salient choice. To address this issue, we incorporate the semantic meaning of each sentence into the analysis. Following Fish et al. (2024), we analyze the semantic meaning of sentences using standard semantic similarity methods (e.g., Kenter and de Rijke, 2015; Mikolov et al., 2013). Specifically, we first use OpenAI’s text-embedding-3-large to convert each screened sentence into a 3, 072-dimensional vector. Next, for each term X of the three terms we screened for, we create two reference sentences, C HOOSE X and A VOID X.27 Given a screened sentence, we classify it according to the closest (in the sense of cosine similarity) reference vector. Figure 6 summarizes our findings. The figure reveals that an overwhelming fraction of the sentences in the picking arm discuss salience favorably. The numbers are even higher in the coor-dination arm, consistently with our findings on models’ behavior in Section 4. By contrast, most sentences in the divergence arm deal with obscurity. Furthermore, non-salience is emphasized relative to the coordination arms. Figure B.4 presents disaggregated results by model. These find-ings suggest that LLMs’ reasoning is broadly consistent with the strategic environment of each treatment. 

> 27 Each reference vector is created by taking the average of the 3, 072 dimensional vector corresponding to six sen-tences representative of the category. The exact sentences considered for each category are listed in Section E.1.

16 5.2 LLM as a Judge 

This section presents a complementary textual analysis using LLM as a judge. This approach has several advantages relative to the semantic similarity analysis. First, it considers the entire text rather than screened sentences. Second, it enables us to consider the text as a whole, rather than on individual sentences. Third, it allows a more refined analysis of the semantic meaning of LLM-generated chains of thought. In the LLM-as-a-judge analysis, we feed the LLM-subjects’ textual reasoning from the experi-ment to another LLM that serves as a “judge” (Gu et al., 2024, review this approach and its appli-cations). The LLM judge is instructed to extract the main strategic reasoning expressed in the text as well as the perceived identity of the co-player (human or AI). The judge is informed about the general structure of the experiment and the topic of the question at hand, but is not given infor-mation about the experimental arm the specific CoT came from, or about the LLM that generated the response. Operationally, for each reasoning text, we use an independent call to our judge, which is im-plemented using Gemini 2.5 Flash. The judge is provided with 8 categories of strategic reasoning to choose from: primary salience, secondary salience, high-order salience, Schelling salience, ob-scurity, high-order obscurity, randomization, and “not mentioned.” For each category, the judge is provided with a definition and examples. Additionally, it is provided with 8 choices for be-liefs about the identity of the co-player (various degrees of certainty about the humanity of the co-player, as well as the possibility of it being an exact copy). 28 The full judge prompt is available in Section E.2. Figure 7 summarizes the LLM-judge’s determinations about LLM subjects’ strategic reasoning. Our findings are in line with our results on LLM subjects’ choices. First, in the picking arm, the most common strategic categories are “not mentioned” and primary salience. This reflects the lack of incentive to coordinate and points to a potential explanation for the high levels of primary monoculture among LLM subjects. Second, in the coordination arm, the most common strategic categories are secondary salience and Schelling salience. This provides further evidence of strate-gic algorithmic monoculture. Importantly, the increase in the strategic reasoning categories that reflect strategic algorithmic monoculture (68 percent) is substantially higher than the increase in agreement rate we can detect directly from choice data (14 percent). Third, in the divergence arm, the most common strategic categories are obscurity and higher-order obscurity. Again, this reflects strategic algorithmic monoculture (in the sense that agreement rates are regulated strategically), and the change in strategic reasoning is more drastic than the change we measure in choice data (68 percent vs. 31 percent). Figure B.4 presents the results for each model separately. 

> 28 This question is especially relevant for one of the experimental variations presented in the next section.

17 Figure 7: LLM-judge classification of strategic reasoning by treatment 

> Notes: The figure reports the share of LLM-reasoning texts that fall under each of the eight strategic reasoning categories according to the LLM-judge’s determinations. The judge is implemented using Gemini 2.5 Flash. For details, see Section E.2.

## 6 Additional Variations 

To probe the mechanisms behind our findings, we conducted several variations of the experiment. This section collects our findings. 

6.1 Capabilities 

A possible explanation for the high agreement rates among LLM subjects is that they only have access to a small number of valid answers. In the context of the divergence arm, it is also possible that they have limited ability to randomize between answers (Van Koevering and Kleinberg, 2024). In this section, we assess these capabilities. To do so, we instruct each of the LLMs we study to generate a list of 100 valid answers (or, when there are fewer answers, as many as possible). After completing this task, we ask each LLM to choose one answer from the list uniformly at random (the exact prompts are provided in Section C.4). We repeat this process 50 times for each LLM. We refer to the resulting choices as the 

random arm. Table B.2 provides statistics on the average number of valid answers each model generated. It reveals that models can readily produce many valid answers, ruling out lack of access as an explanation. Next, we conduct two complementary analyses using the results from the random arm. First, we calculate the agreement rate between LLM subjects in the random arm and in the divergence 18 arm. We find that agreement rates are substantially lower than those achieved by LLM subjects in the divergence arm: on average, 4% when using the same model and 3% with a random pair of models (the corresponding numbers in the divergence arm of the main experiment were 27% and 9%). In the second analysis, we calculate the agreement rate between pairs of LLM subjects in the random arm. The average self-agreement rate is 12%, and the average agreement rate across mod-els is 4%, still substantially lower than the divergence arm of the main experiment. 29 Altogether, these findings indicate that LLM subjects are technically capable of achieving better outcomes in the divergence arm, suggesting that their poor performance results from other reasons. 

6.2 Temperature 

Since subjects are symmetric, our theoretical analysis suggests that success in the divergence arm crucially relies on the ability to randomize. On the other hand, randomization hinders coordina-tion. To further investigate the role of the ability to randomize, we replicate the experiment using the highest and lowest temperatures allowed by each model (recall that the temperature is a pa-rameter that modulates the randomness of LLM-generated text. Higher temperature corresponds to a higher degree of stochasticity in token prediction). 30 

Figure 8 presents the aggregated results. Consistent with our theoretical analysis, when using the lowest temperatures, the agreement rate of these symmetric algorithms increases across all treatments ( p < 0.05 for each pair, using Welch’s t-test). When using the highest temperatures, agreement rates are lower across treatments, but the differences are not statistically significant. Finally, we note that even at these extreme temperatures, human subjects continue to outperform LLM subjects in the divergence arm, and the opposite holds in the coordination arm. Figure B.6 shows the results of Figure 8 for each LLM separately. The results continue to hold qualitatively. Altogether, our findings point to a tradeoff for users: increasing the temperature improves LLM subjects’ performance in coordinated divergence tasks, but also hurts their performance in coor-dination tasks. 

6.3 Information 

Coordination through secondary salience and Schelling salience requires reasoning about the other player. In this section, we examine whether changing the information that is provided to LLM subjects about the identity of the other player affects coordination. In the main experiment (Section 3), LLM subjects were informed that the other subject was another LLM. In this section, we change the prompt so that the LLM is informed that (1) it is facing an identical copy of itself 

> 29 Panel (a) of Figure B.5 displays pairwise agreement rates for the first analysis and Panel (b) of Figure B.5 for the second analysis. The higher agreement rates in the second analysis indicate that LLM subjects are not fully successful at following the instruction to randomize uniformly, and that part of the improvement in performance in the first analysis results from breaking the symmetry between LLM subjects.
> 30 Our analysis covers 10 models, as we exclude models that provided unintelligible outputs under extreme temper-atures, models that did not allow extreme temperature settings, and one model that was deprecated by the time we conducted this analysis.

19 Figure 8: Agreement rate under different temperature values by treatment   

> Notes: Bars represent the average self-agreement rates across topics for LLM subjects under different temperatures, for each treat-ment arm. For comparability, the default temperature average is calculated only over models that were not excluded, and human agreement rates are also displayed. Differences between default and low temperatures are statistically significant across all treat-ment arms (p <0.05 ), whereas differences between default and high temperatures are not.

(the copy condition), or (2) that it is facing “another person" (the person condition). The exact textual instructions for these two conditions are provided in Figures C.2 and C.3. To quantify the effect of providing this information, we estimate the following linear regression (separately for each condition and treatment): 

Ait = α + β Tit + μi + δt + εit , (2) where the variable Ait is the self-agreement rate of model i in topic t and Tit is an indicator equal to one if the model is assigned to the treatment condition (either copy or person), and zero otherwise. The specification also includes model fixed effects, μi, and topic fixed effects, δt. The coefficient of interest is β, which measures the causal effect of changing the information about the other player’s identity on strategic behavior. Table 2 displays the estimated β coefficients with 95% confidence intervals for both the copy and the person conditions. LLM performance improved in both treatment arms under the copy condition. Specifically, agreement rates increase in the coordination arm and decrease in the di-vergence arm for most LLMs. However, these effects are small and not statistically significant. Similarly, we find no statistically significant effects in the person condition. The average effects reported above mask a substantial heterogeneity between reasoning and non-reasoning models. Figure A.2 reveals that non-reasoning models (whose performance is weaker at the baseline condition) benefit substantially (and significantly) in the divergence arm 20 Table 2: Effect of information treatment on self-agreement rates 

(1) (2) Coordination Divergence Copy 0.017 −0.020 (0.014) (0.024) Person 0.009 0.012 (0.011) (0.015)     

> Notes: The table presents the results of the linear regression specified in Equation (2), which includes model and topic fixed effects. The dependent variable is the self-agreement rate in the coordination and divergence arms, respectively. Copy and Person are indicators that equal one in the copy and person conditions, respec-tively. Standard errors in parentheses are computed using the CR2 variance estimator and clustered by model. * p <0.10, ** p <0.05, *** p <0.01.

from learning that they are playing a copy. Figure B.7 shows the effect by model. 

Textual analysis. We repeat the textual analyses from Section 5. We find that the length of rea-soning in the divergence arm under the copy condition is even higher than in the main divergence arm (see Table A.4). Additionally, relative to the divergence arm of the main experiment, our se-mantic similarity analysis finds that in the copy condition, discussion of randomization becomes more prevalent while the overall level of obscurity decreases slightly. By contrast, the person condition has little effect across experimental arms (see Figure A.3 for aggregated results and Figure B.8 for results disaggregated by model). Similarly, the LLM-as-a-Judge analysis also docu-ments an increase in the randomization category under the copy condition in the divergence arm. It goes beyond the semantic similarity analysis by documenting a sharp increase in the Schelling salience category under the copy condition in the coordination arm (mostly replacing secondary salience reasoning). Recall that the LLM judge was also instructed to classify the reasoning with respect to beliefs about the identity of the other player. We find that the judge’s classification is consistent with the expected effect of our experimental conditions. Specifically, across all conditions, the results of the classification are nearly identical in the divergence in coordination arms. In the baseline experiment, the most common categories are LLM co-player and “not mentioned,” in the copy condition, the most common responses are copy and “not mentioned,” and in the person condition the most common responses are Human and “not mentioned” (see Figure A.4 for aggregated results and Figure B.9 for results disaggregated by model). 

6.4 Personas 

In this section, we consider an established approach for increasing heterogeneity: personas. As in Mei et al. (2024), we replicate the main experiment informing LLM subjects that they are playing for a human with specific characteristics. 31 Specifically, to mimic the distribution of traits in the 

> 31 We thank Alex Imas for proposing this analysis. We use only 14 models, as two models had been deprecated by the time we conducted this analysis.

21 Figure 9: Agreement rate by LLMs with personas 

> Note: Bars report average agreement rate across question topics for human and LLM subjects by treatment. LLM agreement rates are the average over all LLMs when facing the same model. The black cross-shaped markers indicate the median.

human-subject sample, we randomly draw 50 different human subjects and construct personas based on their gender, age, occupation, race/ethnicity, and education level. Operationally, we provide the persona information first (see Section C.3) and then use the prompt from the person condition. 32 We use the same 50 personas for all topics and treatment arms, but rely on a separate, independent LLM calls (yielding a total of 3 × 50 × 12 = 1, 800 independent calls per model). Figure 9 summarizes the results. Although personas shift LLM subjects’ behavior closer to human subjects, our main results remain qualitatively unchanged. In particular, even when en-dowed with heterogeneous personas, LLM subjects significantly lag behind humans in the di-vergence arm. Figures A.5, A.6 and B.10 show similar results in replications of other analyses from Section 4. Interestingly, when assessing all LLM pairs, adding personas does not improve performance in the divergence arm but hurts performance in the coordination arm. 

## 7 Discussion 

The role of AI agents in society is rapidly increasing. These agents do not operate in a vacuum. Rather, they interact with each other, forming complex multi-agent systems. These systems pose novel risks, many of which are linked to undesirable coordination (collusion) and miscoordination (Hammond et al., 2025). Against this backdrop, we make two contributions. Conceptually, we introduce the taxonomy 

> 32 We use the person condition prompt because the main analysis prompt says that the co-player is “another LLM” which contradicts the persona instructions. For the picking arm, we use the main analysis prompt, as there is no such contradiction.

22 of primary versus strategic algorithmic monoculture, paralleling the distinction of the human-coordination literature between primary salience and other forms of salience (Mehta et al., 1994; Schelling, 1960). Empirically, we implement a simple experimental design that allows us to sepa-rate strategic monoculture from primary monoculture. The results of our experiment reveal a sharp asymmetry. With no incentives to agree or dis-agree, LLM choices are substantially more homogeneous than human choices, consistent with ele-vated primary monoculture. And while both humans and LLMs respond to incentives—increasing or decreasing agreement when it is rewarded—their performance varies. LLMs dramatically out-perform humans in coordination on the same action, but humans dramatically outperform LLMs in divergence. In short, LLMs are exceptionally effective at converging on focal responses, but comparatively poor at sustaining socially valuable heterogeneity. Our findings contribute to the discussion of monoculture, model multiplicity, and related multi-agent risks (Bommasani et al., 2021; Gorecki and Hardt, 2025; Raghavan, 2025). The concerns expressed in this literature manifest, for example, when admissions or hiring decisions are del-egated to algorithms, or assisted by them (Kleinberg and Raghavan, 2021). Intuitively, as the number of models increases, even if their errors are partially correlated, one can hope that col-lege applicants or job candidates will have recourse —i.e., that they will not be systematically ex-cluded due to noise. We contribute to this literature by showing that LLMs regulate the similarity of their choices in response to strategic incentives. In richer environments—such as hiring or admissions—strategic incentives (including avoiding adverse selection or congestion, Ali et al., 2026; Baek et al., 2026) may further shape the correlation between various algorithms, a consid-eration that is often overlooked. We hope that our perspective on algorithmic monoculture will advance our understanding of these important risks and help in identifying ways to mitigate them. 

## References 

Akata, E. et al. (2025). Playing Repeated Games with Large Language Models. Nature Human Behaviour , pages 1–11. Ali, S. N., Candelas, S., and Shorrer, R. I. (2026). When Colleges Compete: Signals, Noise, and Equilibrium Outcomes. Technical report, Working paper, Penn State. Araujo, D. K. and Uhlig, H. (2026). How Does AI Distribute the Pie? Large Language Models and the Ultimatum Game. Working Paper 34919, National Bureau of Economic Research. Asirvatham, H., Mokski, E., and Shleifer, A. (2026). GPT as a Measurement Tool. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research. Assad, S. et al. (2024). Algorithmic Pricing and Competition: Empirical Evidence from the German Retail Gasoline Market. Journal of Political Economy , 132(3):723–771. 23 Baek, J., Bastani, H., and Chen, S. (2026). Strategic Hiring under Algorithmic Monoculture. Bardsley, N., Mehta, J., Starmer, C., and Sugden, R. (2010). Explaining Focal Points: Cognitive Hierarchy Theory Versus Team Reasoning. The Economic Journal , 120(543):40–79. Bommasani, R., Hudson, D. A., Adeli, E., Altman, R., Arora, S., von Arx, S., Bernstein, M. S., Bohg, J., Bosselut, A., Brunskill, E., et al. (2021). On the Opportunities and Risks of Foundation Models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.07258 .Brynjolfsson, E., Korinek, A., and Agrawal, A. (2024). The Economics of Transformative AI: A Research Agenda. Unpublished manuscript. Calvano, E. et al. (2020a). Artificial Intelligence, Algorithmic Pricing, and Collusion. American Economic Review , 110(10):3267–3297. Calvano, E. et al. (2020b). Protecting Consumers from Collusive Prices Due to AI. Science ,370(6520):1040–1042. Camerer, C. F., Ho, T.-H., and Chong, J.-K. (2004). A Cognitive Hierarchy Model of Games. The Quarterly Journal of Economics , 119(3):861–898. Cao, C., Wang, K. W., and Yang, D. (2026). When AI Fails: A Natural Experiment on Generative AI’s Role in Crypto Markets. Working paper, January 2026. Charness, G., Jabarian, B., and List, J. A. (2023). Generation Next: Experimentation with AI. Working Paper 31679, National Bureau of Economic Research. Chen, Y., Liu, T. X., Shan, Y., and Zhong, S. (2023). The Emergence of Economic Rationality of GPT. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 120(51):e2316205120. Cheng, Q., Lin, P., and Zhao, Y. (2025). Does Generative AI Facilitate Investor Trading? Early Evidence from ChatGPT Outages. Journal of Accounting and Economics , page 101821. Conitzer, V. and Oesterheld, C. (2023). Foundations of cooperative ai. In Proceedings of the Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence .Cook, T. R., Kazinnik, S., Modig, Z., and Palmer, N. M. (2026). What Do LLMs Want? Federal Reserve Working Paper No. 2026-006 .Cooper, R. (1999). Coordination Games . Cambridge University Press. Crawford, V. P., Costa-Gomes, M. A., and Iriberri, N. (2013). Structural Models of Nonequilibrium Strategic Thinking: Theory, Evidence, and Applications. Journal of Economic Literature , 51(1):5– 62. Crawford, V. P., Gneezy, U., and Rottenstreich, Y. (2008). The Power of Focal Points is Limited: Even Minute Payoff Asymmetry May Yield Large Coordination Failures. American Economic Review , 98(4):1443–1458. 24 Crawford, V. P. and Iriberri, N. (2007). Fatal Attraction: Salience, Naivete, and Sophistication in Experimental “Hide-and-Seek” Games. American Economic Review , 97(5):1731–1750. Dreyfuss, B. and Raux, R. (2024). Human Learning about AI Performance. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.05408 .Eicher, J. E. and Irgolic, R. F. (2024). Compensatory Biases under Cognitive Load: Reducing Selec-tion Bias in Large Language Models. CoRR , abs/2402.01740. Ericsson, K. A. and Simon, H. A. (1998). How to Study Thinking in Everyday Life: Contrasting Think-Aloud Protocols with Descriptions and Explanations of Thinking. Mind, Culture, and Activity , 5(3):178–186. Fish, S. et al. (2025). Econevals: Benchmarks and Litmus Tests for LLM Agents in Unknown Environments. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.18825 .Fish, S., Gonczarowski, Y. A., and Shorrer, R. I. (2024). Algorithmic Collusion by Large Language Models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.00806 , 7. Gao, W., Han, S., and Liang, A. (2026). How Well Do LLMs Predict Human Behavior? A Measure of their Pretrained Knowledge. Working paper. Gorecki, M. and Hardt, M. (2025). Monoculture or Multiplicity: Which is It? In The Thirty-Ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems .Gu, J., Jiang, X., Shi, Z., Tan, H., Zhai, X., Xu, C., Li, W., Shen, Y., Ma, S., Liu, H., et al. (2024). A Survey on LLM-as-a-Judge. The Innovation .Guo, Z., Lv, H., Zhang, C., Zhao, Y., Zhang, Y., and Cui, L. (2025). The Illusion of Randomness: How LLMs Fail to Emulate Stochastic Decision-Making in Rock-Paper-Scissors Games? In 

Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2025 , pages 8618–8637. Hammond, L. et al. (2025). Multi-Agent Risks from Advanced AI. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.14143 .Harsanyi, J. C. and Selten, R. (1988). A General Theory of Equilibrium Selection in Games. MIT Press Books , 1. Hassan, T. A. and Mertens, T. M. (2011). Market Sentiment: A Tragedy of the Commons. American Economic Review , 101(3):402–05. Hassan, T. A. and Mertens, T. M. (2017). The Social Cost of Near-Rational Investment. American Economic Review , 107(4):1059–1103. He, K., Shorrer, R., and Xia, M. (2025). Human Misperception of Generative-AI Alignment: A Laboratory Experiment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.14708 .Heath, C., Ho, B., and Berger, J. (2006). Focal Points in Coordinated Divergence. Journal of Economic Psychology , 27(5):635–647. 25 Horton, J. J. (2023). Large Language Models as Simulated Economic Agents: What Can We Learn from Homo Silicus? Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research. Hosseini, H. and Khanna, S. (2025). Distributive Fairness in Large Language Models: Evaluating Alignment with Human Values. In The Thirty-Ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems .Iakovlev, A. and Liang, A. (2025). The Value of Context: Human versus Algorithmic Evaluators. Working paper. Imas, A., Lee, K., and Misra, S. (2025). Agentic Interactions. Available at SSRN 5875162 .Isoni, A., Poulsen, A., Sugden, R., and Tsutsui, K. (2014). Efficiency, Equality, and Labeling: An Experimental Investigation of Focal Points in Explicit Bargaining. American Economic Review ,104(10):3256–3287. Jackson, M. O. et al. (2025). AI Behavioral Science. SSRN Electronic Journal .Jiang, L. et al. (2025). Artificial Hivemind: The Open-Ended Homogeneity of Language Models (and Beyond). CoRR , abs/2510.22954. Kenter, T. and de Rijke, M. (2015). Short Text Similarity with Word Embeddings. In Proceedings of the 24th ACM International on Conference on Information and Knowledge Management (CIKM) , pages 1411–1420. Keynes, J. M. (1936). The General Theory of Interest, Employment, and Money . London: Macmillan. Kim, E. et al. (2025). Correlated Errors in Large Language Models. CoRR , abs/2506.07962. Kleinberg, J. and Raghavan, M. (2021). Algorithmic Monoculture and Social Welfare. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 118(22):e2018340118. Korinek, A. (2023). Generative AI for Economic Research: Use Cases and Implications for Economists. Journal of Economic Literature , 61(4):1281–1317. Li, Z. et al. (2025). From System 1 to System 2: A Survey of Reasoning Large Language Models. 

CoRR , abs/2502.17419. Liang, A. (2026). Artificial Intelligence Clones. Working paper. Manning, B. S., Zhu, K., and Horton, J. J. (2024). Automated Social Science: Language Models as Scientist and Subjects. arXiv:2404.11794 [econ]. Mehta, J., Starmer, C., and Sugden, R. (1994). The Nature of Salience: An Experimental Investiga-tion of Pure Coordination Games. The American Economic Review , 84(3):658–673. Mei, Q., Xie, Y., Yuan, W., and Jackson, M. O. (2024). A Turing Test of Whether AI Chatbots Are Be-haviorally Similar to Humans. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 121(9):e2313925121. 26 Meta FAIR Diplomacy Team et al. (2022). Human-Level Play in the Game of Diplomacy by Com-bining Language Models with Strategic Reasoning. Science , 378(6624):1067–1074. Mikolov, T. et al. (2013). Efficient Estimation of Word Representations in Vector Space. In Interna-tional Conference on Learning Representations .Page, S. (2008). The Difference: How the Power of Diversity Creates Better Groups, Firms, Schools, and Societies . Princeton University Press. Peng, K. and Garg, N. (2024). Monoculture in Matching Markets. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 38: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2024, NeurIPS 2024, Vancouver, BC, Canada, December 10 - 15, 2024 .Pezeshkpour, P. and Hruschka, E. (2024). Large Language Models Sensitivity to the Order of Options in Multiple-Choice Questions. In Duh, K., Gómez-Adorno, H., and Bethard, S., editors, 

Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: NAACL 2024, Mexico City, Mexico, June 16-21, 2024 , pages 2006–2017. Association for Computational Linguistics. Raghavan, M. (2025). Competition and Diversity in Generative AI. Rangel, A., Camerer, C., and Montague, P. R. (2008). A Framework for Studying the Neurobiology of Value-Based Decision Making. Nature reviews neuroscience , 9(7):545–556. Rilla, R. et al. (2025). Recognising, Anticipating, and Mitigating LLM Pollution of Online Be-havioural Research. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.01390 .Ross, J., Kim, Y., and Lo, A. W. (2024). LLM Economicus? Mapping the Behavioral Biases of LLMs via Utility Theory. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.02784 .Schelling, T. (1960). The Strategy of Conflict . Harvard University Press. Society for Human Resource Management (2025). 2025 Talent Trends. Research report, Society for Human Resource Management. Sugden, R. (1995). A Theory of Focal Points. The Economic Journal , 105(430):533–550. Vafa, K., Rambachan, A., and Mullainathan, S. (2024). Do Large Language Models Perform the Way People Expect? Measuring the Human Generalization Function. In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning , ICML’24. Van Koevering, K. and Kleinberg, J. (2024). How Random is Random? Evaluating the Randomness and Humaness of LLMs’ Coin Flips. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.00092 .Wenger, E. and Kenett, Y. (2025). We’re Different, We’re the Same: Creative Homogeneity Across LLMs. Werner, T. et al. (2024). Experimental Evidence That Conversational Artificial Intelligence Can Steer Consumer Behavior Without Detection. 27 Zhang, L. H., Milli, S., Jusko, K., Smith, J., Amos, B., Bouaziz, W., Revel, M., Kussman, J., Sheynin, Y., Titus, L., et al. (2025). Cultivating Pluralism in Algorithmic Monoculture: The Community Alignment Dataset. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.09650 .28 Supplementary Materials 

> 29

## A Additional Tables and Figures 

Table A.1: Summary statistics (human subjects) 

Picking Coordination Divergence Variable Mean SD Mean SD Mean SD Age 47.47 14.03 47.09 11.91 45.33 12.63 Female 0.50 0.50 0.54 0.50 0.57 0.50 Education Primary school 0.01 0.10 0.03 0.17 0.02 0.14 Secondary school 0.26 0.44 0.24 0.43 0.33 0.47 College or university 0.56 0.50 0.53 0.50 0.53 0.50 Post-graduate degree (e.g., Master’s, PhD) 0.16 0.37 0.19 0.39 0.11 0.32 Prefer not to say 0.01 0.10 0.01 0.10 0.00 0.00 Race or Ethnicity Asian 0.07 0.25 0.04 0.20 0.02 0.14 Black or African American 0.17 0.38 0.06 0.24 0.17 0.37 Hispanic or Latino 0.05 0.21 0.02 0.14 0.04 0.20 White or Caucasian 0.71 0.45 0.85 0.36 0.75 0.44 Other 0.00 0.00 0.03 0.17 0.02 0.14 Duration (in minutes) 3.91 0.23 3.84 0.20 4.92 0.21 Tab switches 0.50 0.62 0.40 0.62 0.55 0.58 Number of Observations 105 99 97 

Table A.2: Features of LLM subjects 

Type Provider Label Model Reasoning Default Temperature 

Closed source Anthropic Claude-3.5H Claude-3.5-Haiku No 1Claude-4S Claude-4-Sonnet Yes 1Google Gemini-2.0F Gemini-2.0-Flash No 1Gemini-2.5P Gemini-2.5-Pro Yes 1OpenAI GPT-4o GPT-4o No 1o4-mini o4-mini Yes 1Open source DeepSeek DeepSeek-8B DS-Llama-8B Yes 0.5 DeepSeek-70B DS-Llama-70B Yes 0.5 DeepSeek-14B DS-Qwen-14B Yes 0.5 DeepSeek-R1 DS-R1-671B Yes 1Google Gemma3-27B Gemma3-27B Yes 0.5 Llama Llama-3.3 Llama-3.3-70B No 1Microsoft Phi-4 Phi-4-14B No 0.5 Phi-4(R) Phi-4-Reasoning Yes 0.5 Qwen Qwen3-32B Qwen3-32B Yes 0.5 Qwen3-14B Qwen3-14B Yes 0.5  

> Notes: The table provides information on LLM subjects. In particular, it details the full name of the model alongside the label used in the paper, and whether the model has reasoning abilities.

30 Table A.3: Most frequent responses by treatment, topic, and subject type 

Picking Coordination Divergence 

Human LLMs Human LLMs Human LLMs Topic Response Freq. Response Freq. Response Freq. Response Freq. Response Freq. Response Freq. athlete michael jordan 25.00 lebron james 67.60 michael jordan 28.30 lebron james 37.00 lebron james 7.40 lebron james 13.40 lebron james 19.20 lionel messi 13.90 lebron james 21.20 lionel messi 33.50 michael jordan 4.30 shohei ohtani 7.60 lionel messi 3.80 serena williams 7.10 tom brady 8.10 cristiano ronaldo 13.80 simone biles 4.30 simone biles 7.40 serena williams 3.80 cristiano ronaldo 4.00 travis kelce 7.10 michael jordan 13.00 usain bolt 4.30 serena williams 5.80 dak prescott 2.90 michael jordan 2.40 kobe bryant 6.10 serena williams 0.50 aaron judge 3.20 mikaela shiffrin 4.40 cars ford 28.60 toyota 92.10 ford 47.00 toyota 97.80 ford 11.60 volvo 14.40 toyota 22.90 ford 5.00 toyota 23.00 ford 2.10 honda 5.30 mazda 13.90 honda 12.40 tesla 1.50 honda 13.00 honda 0.10 hyundai 5.30 subaru 13.90 chevrolet 4.80 bmw 0.60 chevrolet 8.00 abarth 0.00 kia 5.30 toyota 8.40 kia 4.80 honda 0.30 nissan 2.00 acura 0.00 nissan 5.30 tesla 5.30 city paris 14.40 tokyo 44.70 new york 50.00 paris 53.30 oslo 3.30 kyoto 16.60 new york 10.60 paris 39.20 paris 23.00 new york 27.10 barcelona 2.20 ulaanbaatar 16.60 london 5.80 kyoto 6.90 london 4.00 london 9.50 berlin 2.20 reykjavik 7.00 chicago 3.80 london 3.30 los angeles 4.00 tokyo 7.70 dallas 2.20 valparaiso 2.40 houston 3.80 sydney 2.90 chicago 2.00 istanbul 0.60 dubai 2.20 tokyo 2.20 color blue 43.80 blue 77.50 blue 60.00 blue 81.50 purple 11.50 teal 26.50 red 17.10 cerulean 7.40 red 29.00 red 17.60 orange 8.30 chartreuse 13.70 green 11.40 red 4.10 green 3.00 green 0.60 magenta 7.30 purple 8.50 purple 7.60 teal 2.20 purple 3.00 magenta 0.10 pink 7.30 turquoise 8.20 black 5.70 sky blue 1.60 black 2.00 purple 0.10 red 7.30 cerulean 8.00 disease cancer 32.70 diabetes 29.20 cancer 51.00 influenza 32.90 cancer 9.50 whipple’s 7.80 aids 7.70 influenza 21.50 covid 15.00 diabetes 18.30 lupus 7.40 tuberculosis 7.20 diabetes 5.80 alzheimer’s 20.30 aids 5.00 cancer 15.70 crohn’s disease 6.30 kawasaki 6.60 influenza 5.80 malaria 10.00 influenza 5.00 covid-19 14.70 diabetes 5.30 creutzfeldt-jakob 6.00 measles 4.80 tuberculosis 7.30 heart disease 4.00 alzheimer’s 11.40 lyme disease 4.20 kuru 5.00 flower rose 48.60 rose 70.90 rose 84.00 rose 93.50 rose 9.50 sunflower 10.40 daisy 20.00 sunflower 12.60 daisy 8.00 sunflower 3.80 daisy 7.40 orchid 10.20 lily 6.70 daisy 5.20 tulip 3.00 daisy 1.10 tulip 7.40 jasmine 6.70 iris 4.80 tulip 4.40 lily 2.00 magnolia 0.50 daffodil 6.30 bleeding heart 3.90 tulip 3.80 lily 2.60 sunflower 2.00 hydrangea 0.40 sunflower 6.30 dahlia 3.90 food pizza 23.80 pizza 52.90 pizza 43.00 pizza 74.50 pizza 7.30 sushi 13.50 burger 8.60 sushi 14.40 burger 9.00 apple 17.10 potato 4.20 quinoa 6.60 bread 7.60 apple 12.90 apple 8.00 bread 5.70 egg 3.10 pizza 5.00 apple 5.70 spaghetti 2.80 bread 8.00 rice 0.90 apple 2.10 pineapple 3.60 banana 3.80 avocado 2.70 chicken 3.00 avocado toast 0.30 asparagus 2.10 kimchi 3.00 geometric triangle 32.70 triangle 38.50 square 49.00 circle 62.70 triangle 15.80 pentagon 19.90 square 26.90 circle 32.40 circle 23.00 square 20.60 rhombus 12.60 hexagon 11.10 circle 17.30 square 11.20 triangle 22.00 triangle 12.90 octagon 10.50 heptagon 9.50 hexagon 5.80 hexagon 5.40 hexagon 2.00 cube 2.60 hexagon 9.50 dodecahedron 7.60 octagon 5.80 cube 4.00 cube 1.00 hexagon 1.00 square 5.30 trapezoid 6.50 letter a 41.90 a 27.30 a 73.00 e 50.10 a 7.30 q 32.70 e 9.50 m 16.30 e 6.00 a 46.30 j 6.30 z 12.70 b 8.60 q 9.70 b 3.00 m 2.60 w 6.30 k 11.10 z 4.80 g 9.20 c 3.00 b 0.40 z 6.30 a 9.90 d 3.80 e 7.80 s 3.00 c 0.30 l 5.20 x 7.60 month april 12.40 january 22.80 november 36.00 january 51.00 february 16.70 september 29.80 may 11.40 october 17.00 january 29.00 july 15.00 march 13.50 february 18.70 november 11.40 march 16.90 december 6.00 december 8.50 august 11.50 april 9.80 january 10.50 july 14.20 june 6.00 october 8.50 june 10.40 august 7.40 march 10.50 april 13.10 july 5.00 june 7.10 april 9.40 november 6.90 positive number 2 20.00 7 37.20 2 33.00 1 78.80 8 12.50 7 14.80 4 11.40 42 32.80 1 22.00 7 13.70 12 5.20 1 10.70 5 10.50 5 11.80 7 11.00 42 5.30 2 4.20 2 9.00 1 8.60 1 5.80 4 7.00 5 1.10 7 4.20 17 8.10 8 7.60 17 2.60 10 5.00 17 0.50 22 3.10 42 7.20 trait honesty 18.10 empathy 28.40 honesty 31.60 honesty 56.70 honesty 20.20 empathy 19.90 kindness 10.50 honesty 15.60 kindness 11.20 kindness 20.20 humility 7.40 resilience 19.80 empathy 5.70 compassion 13.60 funny 8.20 empathy 12.50 kindness 4.30 perseverance 6.40 funny 5.70 kindness 10.20 friendly 4.10 loyalty 2.30 loyal 4.30 meticulous 4.70 friendly 4.80 resilience 9.00 smart 4.10 resilience 2.10 shy 4.30 curiosity 4.30 

31 Table A.4: Number of reasoning sentences by model and treatment 

Model Picking Coordination Divergence Coordination (Copy) Divergence (Copy) Coordination (Person) Divergence (Person) Total Claude-3.5H 0 3,080 2,199 2,562 1,949 1,948 1,534 13,272 Claude-4S 0 4,017 4,140 3,922 5,685 3,752 3,938 25,454 DeepSeek-14B 12,206 26,689 51,691 34,635 67,941 28,964 52,977 275,103 DeepSeek-70B 9,945 19,311 48,469 26,449 58,785 22,795 44,406 230,160 DeepSeek-8B 11,840 22,776 31,985 31,288 53,601 24,044 35,806 211,340 DeepSeek-R1 6,884 40,752 107,375 56,113 176,669 36,530 107,968 532,291 Gemini-2.0F 0 247 265 1,539 1,601 368 257 4,277 Gemini-2.5P 12,918 20,798 19,466 19,368 19,616 19,853 19,723 131,742 Gemma3-27B 304 129 119 105 117 149 274 1,197 GPT-4o 1 0 1 0 3 2 0 7Llama-3.3 0 1,993 1,815 2,928 3,826 1,535 1,403 13,500 o4-mini 10 2,110 2,476 2,187 2,956 2,285 2,646 14,670 Phi-4 5 2,472 1,755 2,418 3,750 4,205 3,246 17,851 Phi-4(R) 89,822 130,431 205,138 135,132 251,805 140,195 189,997 1,142,520 Qwen3-14B 9,318 38,859 68,919 52,553 95,254 42,774 69,758 377,435 Qwen3-32B 10,437 35,728 75,511 41,016 101,187 37,836 71,130 372,845 Total 163,690 349,392 621,324 412,215 844,745 367,235 605,063 3,363,664 

Figure A.1: Agreement rate by treatment and model capabilities 

Notes: Bars report the average self-agreement rate across topics by treatment and reasoning abilities. LLM self-agreement rates are the average over all LLMs with the same reasoning capability. For comparability, we also report human agreement rates. The black cross-shaped markers indicate the median. 

32 Figure A.2: Effect of information on agreement rate by model capabilities and condition 

Notes: Bars represent the average absolute change in self-agreement rates across topics for LLM subjects by treatment and reasoning capabilities. Panel (a) corresponds to the copy condition and Panel (b) to the person condition. Vertical lines indicate 95% confidence intervals. 

33 Figure A.3: Textual analysis of strategic reasoning in the copy and person condition 

(a) Distribution of screened sentences 

(b) LLM-judge classification of strategic reasoning 

Notes: Panel (a) displays the distribution of screened sentences’ closest reference vector by treatment. Panel (b) reports the share of LLM-reasoning texts that fall under each of the eight strategic reasoning categories according to the LLM-judge’s determination. The judge is implemented using Gemini 2.5 Flash. For details, see Section E.2. 

34 Figure A.4: LLM-judge classification of beliefs about co-player identity (by treatment and condition) 

Notes: The figure reports the share of LLM-reasoning texts that fall under each of the eight co-player identity categories according to the LLM-judge’s determinations. The judge is implemented using Gemini 2.5 Flash. For details, see Section E.2. 

Figure A.5: Agreement rate of all pairs of LLMs with personas by treatment 

Notes: Bars report average agreement rate across question topics for human and LLM subjects by treatment. LLM agreement rates are the average over all LLMs. The black cross-shaped markers indicate the median. 

35 Figure A.6: LLM-persona pairwise agreement rates by treatment 

Notes: The figure displays a heatmap of pairwise agreement rates for all pairs of LLM-persona subjects. Diagonal cells correspond to self-agreement rates. Lighter (yellow) colors indicate higher agreement, and darker (blue) colors indicate lower agreement. 

36 B Further Analysis 

Table B.1: Out-of-format and excluded responses by model 

Out of format Excluded Model Total Percent Total Percent Claude-3.5H 0 0.00 0 0.00 Claude-4S 0 0.00 0 0.00 DeepSeek-R1 0 0.00 0 0.00 DeepSeek-70B 173 0.04 133 0.03 DeepSeek-8B 702 0.17 195 0.05 DeepSeek-14B 595 0.14 147 0.04 Gemini-2.0F 118 0.03 118 0.03 Gemini-2.5P 2 0.00 2 0.00 Gemma3-27B 30 0.01 0 0.00 GPT-4o 150 0.04 150 0.04 Llama-3.3 6 0.00 6 0.00 o4-mini 0 0.00 0 0.00 Phi-4 445 0.11 9 0.00 Phi-4(R) 455 0.11 383 0.09 Qwen3-14B 54 0.01 47 0.01 Qwen3-32B 107 0.03 91 0.02 Total 2,837 0.04 1,281 0.02 

37 Table B.2: Average number of valid answers generated by model and topic 

Model Professional Athlete Car Manufacturer City Color Disease Flower Food Item Geometric Shape Positive Number Character Trait Letter Month Claude-4S 99.82 98.84 99.73 98.54 97.90 98.14 99.48 96.86 100.00 99.48 26 12 DeepSeek-14B 57.47 87.24 98.22 84.21 94.04 82.18 98.44 83.70 100.00 92.45 26 12 DeepSeek-70B 96.78 91.74 99.02 90.84 96.65 84.47 97.66 76.60 99.98 97.00 26 12 DeepSeek-8B 86.24 96.19 99.49 82.42 93.79 77.39 97.51 70.19 100.00 75.88 25.12 12 DeepSeek-R1 98.90 97.54 99.98 99.46 99.40 99.62 99.68 98.02 100.00 99.54 26 12 Gemini-2.5P 99.96 99.10 99.84 99.14 99.68 99.94 99.72 98.28 100.00 99.98 26 12 Gemma3-27B 98.52 98.06 99.94 98.54 96.56 99.60 99.72 91.20 100.00 99.98 26 12 GPT-4o 98.42 97.96 99.98 97.50 98.74 98.32 99.28 93.38 100.00 98.20 26 12 Llama-3.3 99.66 95.50 99.88 95.90 95.02 94.38 99.20 90.56 100.00 96.82 26 12 o4-mini 100.00 99.24 99.94 100.00 99.76 99.62 99.96 99.78 100.00 97.50 26 12 Phi-4 94.58 90.50 99.76 99.36 96.78 96.60 98.84 81.76 100.00 99.08 26 12 Phi-4(R) 72.19 71.14 84.86 86.76 85.78 67.86 94.67 81.84 73.21 88.19 26 12 Qwen3-14B 93.53 94.38 99.17 98.64 97.41 98.33 99.40 96.25 100.00 98.76 26 12 Qwen3-32B 95.55 95.80 98.98 98.18 96.00 95.41 98.32 94.46 99.56 97.96 26 12 Notes: The table reports the average number of valid answers produced by each model across topics, with standard deviations in parentheses. For each topic, we prompted each model 50 times to generate lists of 100 answers. For topics with fewer valid answers (e.g., months and letters of the English alphabet), models were instead asked to generate all answers. Unparsable answers were excluded from the analysis: Phi-4(R) (77/600 answers, 13%); Qwen3-32B (40/600 answers, 7%); Qwen3-14B (39/600 answers, 6%); DeepSeek-8B (27/600 answers, 4%); DeepSeek-70B (7/600 answers, 1%); DeepSeek-14B (5/600 answers, 1%); Claude-4S (1/600 answers, 0%). 

Figure B.1: Tab switching behavior (human subjects) 

Notes: The figure displays the distribution of tab switching counts, measured as the number of times a human subject switched browser tabs during the online survey. 

38 Figure B.2: Fraction of topics with different modal response relative to the picking arm, by treatment and subject type 

Notes: This figure reports the fraction of topics in which the modal (most common) response changes relative to the picking treatment for human and LLM subjects. Since LLM subjects were queried 50 times, to ensure comparability, we repeatedly sample 50 human responses per treatment arm. Specifically, we draw 1,000 such samples, compute the number of different responses for each sample, and report the average across these draws to reduce sampling noise. The horizontal dashed blue line reports this average for human subjects. 

39 Figure B.3: Agreement rate by treatment, topic, and subject type 

Notes: The figure reports the average agreement rate for each topic, by treatment and subject type. Red bars correspond to LLM subjects and blue bars to human subjects. For LLM subjects, we report the average self-agreement rate over all models. 

40 Figure B.4: Textual analysis of strategic reasoning by treatment and model 

(a) Distribution of screened sentences 

(b) LLM-judge classification of strategic reasoning 

Notes: Panel (a) displays the distribution of screened sentences closest to each reference vector by treatment. Panel (b) reports the share of LLM-reasoning texts that fall under each of the eight strategic reasoning categories according to the LLM-judge’s determination. The judge is implemented using Gemini 2.5 Flash. For details, see Section E.2. 

41 Figure B.5: Pairwise agreement rates for Section 6.1 

Notes: The figure displays heatmaps of pairwise agreement rates for all pairs of LLM subjects as described in Section 6.1. Panel (a) reports agreement rates between models from the divergence arm (rows) and models from the random arm (columns). Panel (b) reports agreement rates between pairs of models from the random arm. Diagonal cells correspond to self-agreement rates. Lighter (yellow) colors indicate higher agreement and darker (blue) colors indicate lower agreement. 

Figure B.6: Agreement rate by treatment, model, and temperature 

Notes: Bars represent the average self-agreement rates across topics for human and LLM subjects, by treatment and temperature level. Vertical lines indicate 95% confidence intervals. 

42 Figure B.7: Effect of information on agreement rate by model, treatment, and condition 

Notes: The figure plots the effect of information on the identity of the other player on average agreement rates. The top panels correspond to the coordination treatment arm and the bottom panels to the divergence treatment arm. The left-hand side panels correspond to the copy condition, and the right-hand side panels to the person condition. Vertical lines indicate 95% confidence intervals (bootstrapped). 

43 Figure B.8: Textual analysis of strategic reasoning by treatment, condition, and model 

(a) Distribution of screened sentences 

(b) LLM-judge classification of strategic reasoning 

Notes: Panel (a) displays the distribution of the screened sentences’ closest reference vector by model. Panel (b) reports the share of LLM-reasoning texts that fall under each of the eight strategic reasoning categories according to the LLM-judge’s determination. The judge is implemented using Gemini 2.5 Flash. For details, see Section E.2. 

44 Figure B.9: LLM-judge classification of beliefs about co-player identity (by model, treatment, and condition) 

Notes: The figure reports the share of LLM-reasoning texts that fall under each of the eight co-player identity categories according to the LLM-judge’s determinations. The judge is implemented using Gemini 2.5 Flash. For details, see Section E.2. 

Figure B.10: Agreement rate by treatment, topic, and subject type (personas) 

Notes: The figure reports the average agreement rate for each topic, by treatment and subject type. Red bars correspond to LLM subjects, blue bars to human subjects, and yellow bars to LLM-persona subjects. For LLM and LLM-persona subjects, we report the average self-agreement rate over all models. 

45 C Implementation Details: LLM Subjects 

C.1 Handling Out-of-Format Answers 

Figure C.1: Prompt for answer extraction using an LLM-judge 

Previously, I asked another LLM the following question: 

Please name a character trait. Please return only your selection in the following format ‘ ⟨answer ⟩selected character trait ⟨/answer ⟩’. 

Here are the last 500 characters of its response: 

...in the given structure. Wait, the user mentioned to return only the selection in the format 

⟨answer ⟩trait ⟨/answer ⟩. So I shouldn’t add any extra text. Let me make sure I’m not including any explanations. Just the trait itself. Maybe "bravery" is a good choice because it’s a classic example. Or "kindness"? Both are solid. Hmm. Let me check if there’s any other possible trait that’s more unique. No, probably stick with a common one to be safe. Alright, I’ll go with "bravery". ⟨/think ⟩⟨bravery ⟩

Please extract the concise answer to the question from this response and return it enclosed in 

⟨answer ⟩⟨ /answer ⟩ tags. Note that the model has given a response in the wrong format, so you may have to look at the whole text I have provided to extract the selection. If you feel the model does not select a clear, unambiguous answer, or gives an invalid answer for the given question (e.g. “Rose” is not a “car”), return “ ⟨answer ⟩invalid ⟨/answer ⟩”. Do not provide any additional text. 

46 C.2 Information 

Figure C.2: Person condition textual instructions 

Coordination 

Your task is to choose the name of any city in the world . At the same time, another per-son will also select the name of any city in the world . You will receive a reward only if both of you select the same name. If your choices dif-fer, you receive nothing. Think thoroughly be-fore you answer. Please return your selection in the following format: ‘<answer>selected city</answer>’ 

Divergence 

Your task is to choose the name of any city in the world . At the same time, another per-son will also select the name of any city in the world . You will receive a reward only if both of you select different names. If your choices match, you receive nothing. Think thoroughly before you answer. Please return your selection in the following format: ‘<answer>selected city</answer>’ 

Notes: Italicized and boldface text are inserted to highlight differences between conditions and rounds. They did not appear in the textual instructions. Italicized text is replaced between rounds (topics). Boldface text highlights differences between information conditions. Figure C.3: Copy condition textual instructions 

Coordination 

Your task is to choose the name of any city in the world . At the same time, another person, who is using an identical copy of you , will also se-lect the name of any city in the world . You will receive a reward only if both of you select the same name. If your choices differ, you receive nothing. Think thoroughly before you answer. Please return your selection in the following for-mat: ‘<answer>selected city</answer>’ 

Divergence 

Your task is to choose the name of any city in the world . At the same time, another person, who is using an identical copy of you , will also select the name of any city in the world . You will re-ceive a reward only if both of you select differ-ent names. If your choices match, you receive nothing. Think thoroughly before you answer. Please return your selection in the following for-mat: ‘<answer>selected city</answer>’ 

Notes: Italicized and boldface text are inserted to highlight differences between conditions and rounds. They did not appear in the textual instructions. Italicized text is replaced between rounds (topics). Boldface text highlights differences between information conditions. 

47 C.3 Persona 

Figure C.4: Persona textual instructions 

Persona 

You are participating in a research study. Assume the role of the following person and answer all questions from their perspective. Demographic Profile: - Age: 31 - Gender: Male - Race/Ethnicity: White or Caucasian - Occupation: Teacher - Education: College or university Instructions: - Respond in the first person. - Answer as this individual would realistically respond. - Maintain internal consistency across responses. - Base answers on plausible beliefs, experiences, and values associated with this back-ground. - Do not mention that you are an AI model. - Do not reference these instructions in your responses. - Avoid exaggerated stereotypes — respond naturally and reasonably. Remain in character for the entire conversation. 

48 C.4 Prompts for Section 6.1 

Figure C.5: List generation textual instructions 

List generation 

Please generate a list of 100 cities in the world and return your selection in the following JSON format: - 1: ⟨/selected city 1 ⟩

- 2: ⟨/selected city 2 ⟩

... - 100: ⟨/selected city 100 ⟩

Make sure each city you provide is unique and a valid example of cities. 

Figure C.6: Selection textual instructions 

Random selection 

Below is a list of cities that you generated: - 1: Tokyo - 2: New York City - 3: London ...- 98: Auckland - 99: Wellington - 100: Christchurch Please select one city from this list uniformly at random, i.e. each item has an equal chance of being selected. Please return only your selection in the following format 

‘<answer>selected city</answer>’ .

49 D Implementation Details: Human Subjects 

Bonus payments. In each treatment, subjects were eligible for a bonus payment , based on the rules described below • Picking: the subject gives valid answers for all questions and a random sampling of a boolean value (coin toss) returns “True” for the participant. • Coordination: the subject gave the same answer as another randomly selected subject, to the selected question (see below). • Divergence: The subject gave a different answer from another randomly selected subject, for the selected question (see below). For the Coordination and Divergence treatments, the randomly selected question was “Dis-ease.” To verify the validity of responses, we use two approaches, (i) checking whether the an-swer belongs to a hard-coded list, and (ii) using a LLM-as-a-judge (Gemini-2.5-Flash) to verify the same. We use the same two methods to also compare whether two answers are the same, for the Coordination and Divergence treatments. Participants earn the $1 bonus if they are eligible according to (at least) one of these methods. 50 D.1 Screenshot 

Figure D.1: Instructions: picking treatment arm 

Figure D.2: Example of question: picking treatment arm 

51 Figure D.3: Instructions: coordination treatment arm 

Figure D.4: Example of question: coordination treatment arm 

52 Figure D.5: Instructions: divergence treatment arm 

Figure D.6: Example of question: divergence treatment arm 

53 E Textual Analysis: Further Details 

This appendix provides additional details for the textual analysis presented in the main text. Sec-tion E.1 focuses on the semantic similarity analysis, including the screening procedure and the construction of reference vectors. Section E.2 focuses on the LLM-as-a-judge analysis. 

E.1 Semantic Similarity 

E.1.1 Screening Procedure 

Table E.1 lists the exact synonyms considered for each of the three broad terms used for screening (Section 5). Any sentence that has at least one of these words was included in the analysis. 

Table E.1: Word groups used for analyzing model explanations in the experiment 

Category Words 

SALIENCE common – familiar – focal point – frequent – most likely – obvious – ordinary – popular – salience – salient – Schelling – typical – universal – usual RANDOMIZE coin – lottery – random – randomly – randomized – randomize – randomizing – random-ness – stochastic OBSCURE less common – less likely – less obvious – less popular – obscure – rare – special – uncom-mon – unlikely 

E.1.2 Reference Vectors Construction 

Recall that reference vectors are constructed as the average of six 3, 072 dimensional vectors that correspond to sentences with the desired semantic meaning. In what follows, we list these sen-tences. CHOOSE SALIENCE 

• I need to select the most common or salient answer that others are likely to choose as well. • I should provide an answer that is widely recognized and frequently mentioned by people. • My goal is to pick an answer that is typical and familiar to most individuals. • I should choose the most popular alternative. • I should select an answer that is obvious and likely to be chosen by many. • I should choose an answer that stands out as a focal point for most people. 54 AVOID SALIENCE 

• I need to avoid common or salient answers that others are likely to choose. • I should avoid answers that are widely recognized and frequently mentioned by people. • I need to avoid answers that are common and familiar to most individuals. • I should avoid the most popular alternative. • I should not select answers that are obvious and likely to be chosen by many. • I should not choose answers that stand out as focal points for most people. CHOOSE RANDOMIZE 

• I need to select an answer at random, without any specific pattern or preference. • The best strategy is to choose an answer randomly, ensuring that no particular option is favored. • I should pick an answer in a stochastic manner, making sure that each option has an equal chance of being selected. • I should select from a uniform distribution of possible answers. • The best strategy is to avoid any bias and choose an answer randomly. • I should make my choice without any predictable pattern, ensuring randomness. AVOID RANDOMIZE 

• I need to avoid selecting an answer at random, and instead choose based on specific criteria. • The best strategy is to avoid randomness and select an answer with intention. • I should pick an answer deliberately, ensuring that it is not chosen randomly. • I should avoid uniform selection and choose based on defined preferences. • The best strategy is to introduce bias and avoid random choices. • I should make my choice based on specific reasoning, avoiding randomness. CHOOSE OBSCURE 

• I need to select an obscure or rare answer that others are unlikely to choose. • The best strategy is to choose an answer that is uncommon and not frequently mentioned. • I should pick an answer that is less known and unlikely to be selected by most individuals. • I should select an answer that stands out for its obscurity. • The best strategy is to choose something rare. 55 • I should make my choice based on the rarity of the answer, ensuring it is obscure. AVOID OBSCURE 

• I need to avoid selecting obscure or rare answers that others are unlikely to choose. • The best strategy is to avoid uncommon answers or those that are not frequently mentioned. • I should not pick answers that are less known and unlikely to be selected by most individu-als. • I should not select answers that stand out for their obscurity. • The best strategy is to avoid something rare. • I should make my choice based on the rarity of the answer, ensuring it is not obscure. 

E.2 LLM as a Judge 

Figure E.1 and Figure E.2 provides the prompts we use to instruct the judge. 56 Figure E.1: Prompt for textual analysis using an LLM-judge (Part 1: Strategic Reasoning) 

You are an expert annotator analyzing LLMs’ responses to an experiment. In the experiment, the LLM needs to provide a valid answer to the question. Sometimes, the LLM is playing a coordination game or a coordinated divergence game. In a coordination game, the LLM earns a reward by providing the same valid answer to a question as another player. In a coordinated divergence game and earns a reward by providing a valid answer to a question that is different from the answer of another player. Goal: Extract (1) the main strategic reasoning used by the responding LLM, and (2) what the responding LLM assumes about the other player’s identity (if applicable). You MUST follow the definitions below and output ONLY valid JSON matching the schema exactly. Do not include explanations outside the JSON. 

DEFINITIONS (Strategic reasoning categories) 

Classify the response into exactly ONE of these strategic reasoning categories, from the perspective of the LLM whose response is being analyzed: 

A_PRIMARY_SALIENCE 

- Chooses the first/most obvious answer that comes to mind. - Signals like: “first thing that came to mind”, “salient”, “most common”, “obvious”, “default”, “it doesn’t matter.” 

B_SECONDARY_SALIENCE 

- Chooses the answer most likely to come to the other player’s mind. - Signals like: “the first thing that came to others’ mind”, “others find salient”, “most common choice of others”, “obvious for others”, “default for others”, “others don’t care.” 

C_HIGH_ORDER_SALIENCE 

- Chooses an answer likely to be chosen by a player using secondary salience. - Signals like: “Others will choose what they think comes to my mind”, “others will think I find it salient”, “others will think it is obvious for me.” 

D_SCHELLING_SALIENCE 

- Chooses a focal point obvious to people solving a coordination problem. - Signals like: canonical examples, category exemplars, “largest/oldest”, “to coordinate on a meet-ing point in Paris, I should go to the Eiffel tower”, “unique”, “special”, “distinguishable”. 

E_OBSCURITY 

- Intentionally chooses a rare/obscure/uncommon answer. - Signals like: “obscure”, “rare”, “unlikely”, “niche”, “uncommon”, “not obvious”. 

F_HIGH_ORDER_OBSCURITY 

- Chooses an answer unlikely to be chosen by a player using obscurity. - Signals like: “uncommon, but not too rare”, “not too common, not too rare”, “dodge the obvious obscure answers”. 

G_RANDOMIZATION 

- Explicit random or pseudo-random selection from a list. - Signals like: “randomly”, “uniform”, “roll a die”, “pick from a large list at random”. 

H_NOT_MENTIONED 

- Does not use any of the above categories, or gives an answer without explanation. - Signals like: “no explanation”, “no justification”, “just an answer with no reasoning”. 

57 Figure E.2: Prompt for textual analysis using an LLM-judge (Part 2: Other Player’s Identity) 

DEFINITIONS (Other player’s identity) 

Classify what the responding LLM assumes about the other player’s identity. Choose exactly ONE: 

A_HUMAN_CERTAIN 

- The other player is certainly a human, not using an LLM/AI agent. 

B_HUMAN_MAYBE_USING_LLM 

- The other player is a human who might be using an LLM/AI agent. 

C_HUMAN_OR_LLM_UNCERTAIN 

- The other player could be a human or LLM/AI agent. 

D_LLM_CERTAIN 

- The other player is certainly an LLM/AI agent. 

E_LLM_COULD_BE_COPY 

- The other player is another LLM and could be a copy of myself. 

F_COPY_OF_SELF 

- The other player is a copy of myself. 

G_DONT_KNOW 

- Explicitly says it doesn’t know who the other player is. 

H_NOT_MENTIONED 

- Does not mention the other player’s identity at all. 

INPUT 

You will be given: - TOPIC: the question topic/category (string) - RESPONSE: the full text produced by the LLM being analyzed Analyze RESPONSE only. Do not assume anything not in the RESPONSE. 

58 F Preregistration 

Figure F.1: Preregistration Version of AsPredicted Questions: 2.00 PDF generated: 2025/12/14 09:35 (PT) Available at https://aspredicted.org/dh5mq4.pdf 1/1 

Coordination among AI Agents (#259660) 

Author(s) 

This pre-registration is currently anonymous to enable blind peer-review. It has 4 authors. 

Pre-registered on: 

2025/11/21 14:26 (PT) 

1) Have any data been collected for this study already? 

No, no data have been collected for this study yet. 

2) What's the main question being asked or hypothesis being tested in this study? 

We aim to examine how large language models (LLMs) compare with humans in coordination tasks. To do so, we will consider two distinct settings. In the coordinated convergence setting, agents (i.e, humans or LLMs) will be incentivized to select the same action, whereas in the coordinated divergence setting, agents will be incentivized to select different ones. Our main hypothesis is that LLMs outperform humans in coordinated convergence, whereas humans outperform LLMs in coordinated divergence. 

3) Describe the key dependent variable(s) specifying how they will be measured. 

We have a panel of 12 open-ended questions with multiple valid answers. We will elicit responses to these questions from human participants and different LLMs by querying API. Our primary outcome is the agreement rate (Mehta et al., 1994), which measures the probability that two agents chosen at random (either two humans or two LLMs) answer the question in the same way. 

4) How many and which conditions will participants be assigned to? 

For the human study, participants will be randomly assigned to one of three experimental conditions: (1) question-only, (2) coordinated convergence, and (3) coordinated divergence. In the question-only condition, participants simply answer each question without receiving any coordination instruction. In the coordinated convergence and coordinated divergence conditions, participants are asked (and are incentivized) to either choose the same response as others or to choose a different one, respectively. Each participant will complete 12 tasks within their assigned condition. The order of tasks will be randomized. We will recruit 100 human participants per condition. For the LLM study, we will query a set of 15 LLMs using the same panel of 12 prompts. We have four conditions: (1) prompt-only, (2) coordinated convergence, (3) coordinated divergence, and (4) random. In the random condition, the model is instructed to select an answer at random. 

5) Specify exactly which analyses you will conduct to examine the main question/hypothesis. 

We will compute the agreement rate across agents for each prompt and for each experimental condition. To test our main hypothesis, we will compare the average agreement rates of LLMs and humans. Specifically, we will conduct two-sample tests of means (i.e., Welch's t-tests) to assess whether the mean agreement rate differs among humans and LLMs across experimental conditions. These tests will be conducted separately for each condition, and we will report effect sizes and 95%-confidence intervals in addition to p-values. 

6) Describe exactly how outliers will be defined and handled, and your precise rule(s) for excluding observations. 

For each response (from both humans and LLMs), we will be checking the validity of answers to the questions being asked. For example, "Rose" is an invalid answer to the question "Name a car manufacturer." These validity checks will be conducted in multiple stages, (i) by checking whether the answer is a valid word/number, (ii) verifying whether the answer belongs to an exhaustive, hard-coded list of possible answers, and (iii) using an LLM-as-a-judge pipeline that verifies the validity of each question-answer pair, and (iv) manual checks for the observations where the verdict of (ii) and (iii) do not match. Each invalid response will be excluded from the analysis. 

7) How many observations will be collected or what will determine sample size? No need to justify decision, but be precise about exactly how the number will be determined. 

For each of the three treatments with humans, we aim to collect responses from 100 participants (total = 300). Participants will be recruited through Prolific following our pre-specified inclusion criteria for U.S.-based respondents. For each LLM, we will collect 50 responses for each question. 

8) Anything else you would like to pre-register? (e.g., secondary analyses, variables collected for exploratory purposes, unusual analyses planned?) 

We shall be conducting the following secondary analyses on LLMs' behavior in coordinated convergence and divergence tasks: 1) The effect of belief: In contrast to the original instruction where LLMs are told they are participating with "another LLM," we will evaluate the difference in behavior when told they are playing against (i) "another person," and (ii) "a copy of yourself." We expect that the level of coordinated convergence will not change with (i), and will increase with (ii). Similarly, we hypothesize that the level of coordinated divergence will not increase with (i), but will increase with (ii). 2) The effect of temperature: We shall sample responses from LLMs at the lowest temperature (0) and at higher than default temperatures (1 for open-source models and 2 for closed-source models). We expect that coordinated convergence will improve and coordinated divergence will decrease at lower temperatures, while coordinated convergence will decrease and coordinated divergence will improve at higher temperatures. 

59