Title: Humans and transformer LMs: Abstraction drives language learning

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.17475v1

Published Time: Thu, 19 Mar 2026 01:02:24 GMT

Number of Pages: 14

Markdown Content:
# Humans and transformer LMs: Abstraction drives language learning 

## Jasper Jian and Christopher D. Manning 

## Stanford University 

## jjian@stanford.edu , manning@cs.stanford.edu 

## Abstract 

Categorization is a core component of hu-man linguistic competence. We investigate how a transformer-based language model (LM) learns linguistic categories by comparing its behaviour over the course of training to be-haviours which characterize abstract feature –based and concrete exemplar –based accounts of human language acquisition. We investi-gate how lexical semantic and syntactic cate-gories emerge using novel divergence-based metrics that track learning trajectories using next-token distributions. In experiments with GPT-2 small, we find that (i) when a construc-tion is learned, abstract class-level behaviour is evident at earlier steps than lexical item– specific behaviour, and (ii) that different lin-guistic behaviours emerge abruptly in sequence at different points in training, revealing that ab-straction plays a key role in how LMs learn. This result informs the models of human lan-guage acquisition that LMs may serve as an existence proof for. 

## 1 Introduction 

Linguistic constructions involve generalizations over classes of words, such as ditransitive or sen-tential complement-taking verbs, rather than id-iosyncratic patterns applying to individual lexical items. Language models (LMs) must learn these categories in order to systematically understand and generate text (Lake and Baroni, 2018; Kim and Linzen, 2020). Indeed, work has shown that LMs by the end of training do learn to adeptly categorize. For example, subject-verb agreement (Marvin and Linzen, 2018; Goldberg, 2019; Hao and Linzen, 2023) requires categorizing singular vs. 

plural nouns. This raises the question: what are the 

processes LMs use to learn these generalizations? While interpretability work has begun to decode how trained transformers work, less work has ex-amined their acquisition of knowledge during train-ing (Liu et al., 2021; Choshen et al., 2022) and We went to the farmer’s market.    

> Sam fled to the mountains.
> I gave a book to Emma.
> John sold a car to the student.
> to Dative Motion
> (a)
> (b) (c)
> Differentiation
> Training step
> Between classes
> Within classes

Figure 1: (a) Categories, like verb classes determined by argument structure, are pervasive in language: to Dative verbs take recipient arguments, whereas Motion verbs take goal locations. (b) Divergence metrics compare LM prediction distributions conditioned on different cat-egories. (c) Tracking divergences over training reveals that categories like verb classes are differentiated early by LMs, before gradual item-level learning. 

even less has compared transformer LM learning with human language learning (Chang and Bergen, 2022; Evanson et al., 2023). We draw on theo-ries of human language acquisition to tackle the latter question, investigating what hypothesized processes of category formation LM learning cor-responds to. We contrast the abstraction -first ac-count and the exemplar -first account which hy-pothesize that learning privileges (a) linking the input data to abstract featural representations (e.g., Pinker, 1989; Gleitman, 1990; Fisher et al., 2020), and (b) storing linguistic examples observed in the input (e.g., Tomasello, 1992, 2003; Ambridge and Lieven, 2015), respectively. We compare the behaviour of GPT-2 over the course of autoregressive pretraining to predictions made by these two accounts, targeting phenom-ena LMs have been shown to learn. Experiment 1 studies how arguments predicted for individual verbs and verb classes change over training (Fig-ure 1; Thrush et al., 2020; Wilson et al., 2023) and Experiment 2 investigates syntactic subcatego-rization and non-local dependencies (Wilcox et al., 

> arXiv:2603.17475v1 [cs.CL] 18 Mar 2026

2019, 2024; Warstadt et al., 2020). We find that the abstraction-first account better corresponds to GPT-2 learning across all phenomena tested: linguistic constructions are learned for classes of words at once and individual phenomena are learned sequen-tially. Furthermore, the ordering of learning onsets corresponds to expected linguistic development in children. While our experiments involve a single model and do not impose humanlike constraints on train-ing data, our investigation contributes to growing debates around what theories of human linguistic cognition standardly trained autoregressive LMs provide support for (Portelance and Jasbi, 2024). These findings suggest that LMs have a bias to-wards forming abstractions. Nevertheless, LMs differ from influential abstraction-first accounts of human learning proposing that linguistic categories are innate: LMs learn categories distributionally. 

## 2 Background 

2.1 Abstraction-first and exemplar-first learning in children 

How argument structure is learned has motivated two views on the processes underlying human language acquisition: the abstraction-first account, claiming that children learn structured representa-tions early, and the exemplar-first account, claiming that children first memorize linguistic input. The abstraction-first account is supported by findings like young children’s ability to compre-hend sentences containing novel verbs by relying on the syntactic structure of the sentence alone (e.g., Naigles, 1990) and their incorrect, but meaningful, overextension of syntactic constructions to verbs (e.g., ‘you can’t happy me’ ; Bowerman, 1982). Abstraction-first accounts explain this as a product of an inductive bias for learning general, abstract properties of language that extend beyond individ-ual words, such as how the syntactic positions of arguments correspond to meanings (Landau and Gleitman, 1985; Pinker, 1989; Gleitman, 1990). Children then use abstract knowledge like this to aid in learning new verbs and to continue refining their representations of previously seen verbs. The exemplar-first account is supported by find-ings that young children often only use verbs with nouns (Tomasello, 1992, 2003) and struc-tures (Lieven et al., 1997) they have they have observed occurring together, as well as evidence that even basic linguistic properties like word order are learned slowly over time (Abbot-Smith et al., 2001). Exemplar-first accounts propose that these effects arise because children learn by memoriz-ing observed instances of language (‘exemplars’) resulting in lexical item–specific knowledge. Ab-stractions emerge gradually via repeated exposure and retention, or analogy over stored exemplars (Abbot-Smith and Tomasello, 2006; Bybee, 2006; Ambridge, 2020). What occurs over the course of learning differ-entiates the two accounts, in particular, when class-based behaviour vs. lexical-item specific behaviour emerge. Our experiments exploit this difference to probe whether the learning biases of standard transformer LMs can be characterized as being abstraction-first or exemplar-first. 

2.2 Related work on language models 

Work in NLP and ML focused on downstream task performance or privacy and copyright concerns has discussed the extent to which LMs (and DNNs) implement generalization and memorization mech-anisms (Arpit et al., 2017; Carlini et al., 2019, 2023; Tirumala et al., 2022; Huang et al., 2024, a.o.). We investigate these mechanisms further in the context of how LMs learn linguistic phenomena motivated by hypotheses about human language acquisition. Previous linguistic work has shown that LMs learn phenomena that abstract over specific lex-ical items, looking at fully-trained LMs (Gulor-dava et al., 2018; Newman et al., 2021; Lasri et al., 2022; Papadimitriou et al., 2022; Jian and Reddy, 2023) or finetuning fully-trained LMs (Kim and Smolensky, 2021; Wilson et al., 2023; Misra and Kim, 2023). We suggest that learning trajectories 

can better disambiguate the mechanisms and bi-ases active in LMs (e.g., Kallini et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2024; Chang et al., 2024; Dankers and Titov, 2024; Antonello and Cheng, 2024) that may ex-plain the stability of linguistic learning across mod-els and datasets (Liu et al., 2021; Choshen et al., 2022; Evanson et al., 2023) and their ability to gen-eralize even to structures absent in their training data (Potts, 2024; Misra and Mahowald, 2024; Patil et al., 2024). Closest to our work, Misra and Kim (2023) compare exemplar and abstraction theories in a nonce word learning setting and Yang et al. (2025) in a transformer-based speech model, both settling on a middle ground conclusion of ‘abstrac-tions encoded by exemplars.’ However, they only evaluate fully-trained models – Huang et al. (2024) show that memorization (i.e., exemplar-storage) CLASS EXAMPLE VERBS EXAMPLE SENTENCES TOTAL                                    

> (i) to Dative give ,sell ,grant (n=35) Chipotle gave away free burritos to the __ 1841 (ii) Motion go ,walk ,flee (n=36) Toby accordingly goes to the __ 1942 (iii) Reciprocal speak ,meet ,talk (n=16) Cherry recalled Orr had refused to speak with the __ 465 (iv) spray-load spray ,load ,smear (n=16) Ray and Devon then sprayed the table with the __ 404
> Table 1: Example verbs and sentence prefixes from the four verb classes used in the experiments.

abilities change over the course of LM training, em-phasizing the need to evaluate behaviours during training to provide a fuller picture of LM mecha-nisms, as we do here. 

## 3 Experiment 1: What drives argument structure learning in LMs? 

3.1 Data and Models Empirical domain Argument structure classes allow us to compare item-specific and class-general effects during learning. We measure the arguments predicted for each verb as a proxy for verb catego-rization. Four argument structure classes were used which each have arguments introduced by preposi-tions: (i) to -dative verbs, (ii) verbs of motion , (iii) 

reciprocal verbs, and (iv) spray -load verbs (see Table 1). Classes (i) and (ii) use the preposition to ,and (iii) and (iv) use with . The arguments in the post-preposition slot form semantic classes (Pinker, 1989; Dowty, 2003): (i) recipients, (ii) goal loca-tions, (iii) reciprocal objects, and (iv) substances. LMs must abstract over the specific nouns that they observe with each verb to learn the broad class of nouns that can occur in a given the argument slot. 

Trajectories Early changes to predictions involv-ing learning broad categories of nouns for the argu-ment slots across a group of verbs would provide evidence of an abstraction-first mechanism. Early changes involving idiosyncratic learning for indi-vidual verbs, with class-like behaviour emerging later, would evidence an exemplar-first mechanism. 

Dataset We track the arguments that are pre-dicted by LMs in the target position by taking next-token predictions at the underlined position in sen-tences containing the structure in (1). Using these distributions, we can track when predictions begin to change when comparing any two verbs (evidence of item-specific learning), and when predictions are more similar for verbs that belong to the same class than for verbs that belong to a separate compari-son class (evidence of class-general learning). We compare between pairs of verb classes that share     

> Figure 2: Pairwise DJS between verbs in two classes at three early steps in training. Each row and column represents a single verb. Differentiation into verb classes is evident when any change has occurred – between-class quadrants have higher DJS (top-right, bottom-left) than in-class quadrants (top-left, bottom-right).

a preposition – (i) & (ii), (iii) & (iv) – ensuring that differences in argument preferences are the result of verb identity, rather than the identity of the preposition itself. (1) ... VERB ... PREPOSITION the __ Our dataset contains natural sentences that fea-ture the target verbs in the desired syntactic frame filtered from the WikiText-103 dataset (Merity et al., 2016). To find target structures, sentences were filtered with regular expressions and Stanza dependency parses (Qi et al., 2020), before being manually annotated by the authors to account for parser errors and non-target senses of the chosen verbs. 

Models We test for these effects over the course of standard pretraining using training checkpoints of GPT-2 models (Radford et al., 2019) released by Karamcheti et al. (2021). Each model was au-toregressively trained on the OpenWebText corpus (Gokaslan et al., 2019). We track behaviour over 450 checkpoints (400K steps). Models are trained with a batch size of 32. We choose to use GPT-2 small models (decoder-only transformers; 12 layers and 12 attention heads per layer) given that smaller models have been shown to better predict human linguistic behaviour (Oh and Schuler, 2023). These models have been shown to perform well on stan-dard linguistic benchmarks (e.g., Warstadt et al., 2020) and have previously been used to evaluate inductive biases of transformer LMs (Kallini et al., 2024). We report results for a single random seed for clarity, though all described behaviour was con-firmed across three runs with different seeds. 

3.2 Paradigm and Metrics Paradigm For any verb, we collect next-token distributions across different prefixes. Since we are interested in comparing argument structure predic-tions at the verb level, we derive a single estimate associated with each verb from the individual dis-tributions obtained from each prefix. For each verb 

v this is defined as the arithmetic mean of the con-ditional next token distributions over the set Sv of 

N prefixes containing verb v:1

Pv(x) = 1 

> N
> PNi=1

P (x|si), s i ∈ Sv.We assume that different inflections of a single verb (tense, aspect, and agreement) do not make a significant contribution to argument predictions. We compute pairwise similarity scores between verbs by taking the Jensen–Shannon divergence, 

DJS , between the distributions defined above (Lin, 1991). This allows us to compute similarity without predefining a set of relevant nouns. Divergence metrics like DJS provide natural interpretations of learning onsets , as opposed to metrics like accuracy. Consider two linguistic variables a and b, each contained within prefixes sa and sb, which should license different continuations, e.g., a is a to Dative verb and b is a Motion verb. We obtain two next-token distributions from the LM 

A = P (x|sa), B = P (x|sb).If DJS (A|| B) = 0 , then we know that the LM must not have learned to distinguish between vari-ables a and b because the prediction distributions are maximally similar. Non-zero DJS (A|| B) is the necessary condition for a LM to have begun to distinguish variables correctly during training. 2

Previous work has used accuracy scores derived from comparing log-probabilities of sequences, e.g., targeted syntactic evaluation (Marvin and                                    

> 1This is equivalent to an estimate of P(x|v), obtained by marginalizing over contexts siusing samples from P(x|Sv, v )
> under the assumption that P(Sv|v)is uniform.
> 2Smoothing is not required as next-token distributions un-der autoregressive LMs do not contain true zeroes.
> Figure 3: Mann-Whitney U-test between UA=
> {DJS (Pvt(x)|| Pv(x)) :v, v t∈C1}(same class),
> UB={DJS (Pvt(x)|| Pv(x)) : vt∈C1, v ∈C2}(dif-ferent class), for verb classes C1, C 2. Mean of DJS
> across verbs in the same class. Shading is standard de-viation.

Linzen, 2018; Warstadt et al., 2020), on linguis-tic benchmarks to measure onsets of learning (Choshen et al., 2022; Evanson et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2024). However, accuracy metrics may be artificially steep (Schaeffer et al., 2023) and it is un-clear how to determine the onset of learning if, e.g., baseline accuracy decreases before increasing. The divergence metrics we use are smooth, i.e., no con-cerns with artificial steepness, and lower-bounded by zero, so increases can be directly interpreted as onsets of behavioural change. 

Item learning metric Given pairwise DJS be-tween all verbs across two classes, we measure the emergence of item-specific learning independent of effects of verb class as the mean DJS between verb 

v and verbs within the same class. If in-class DJS 

increases, then idiosyncratic properties of verb v

that are not general to the class have been learned. 

Class learning metric Given DJS between verb 

v with verbs from the same class UA, and with verbs from the other class UB we use a one-tailed Mann-Whitney U-test to determine statistically sig-nificance (Mann and Whitney, 1947). If mean UB

is greater than UA and statistically significant un-der our test, then we can conclude that the model has learned some systematic property across verbs belonging to a class that separates them from verbs belonging to the other class. Figure 4: Mean pairwise Spearman correlations be-tween prototype noun trajectories for each verb across training. Within-class and between-class means are re-ported with 95% CI. 

3.3 Results: Distributional metrics 

In Figure 3, we report the percentage of verbs for which the mean DJS with verbs from the opposite class are greater than the mean DJS with verb from the same class ( p < 0.001 as a threshold). For the (i) to Datives and (ii) Motion classes, class-based distinctions (pink) emerge 50 steps before in-class differences begin (green, orange), whereas for the (iii) Reciprocal and (iv) spray – load classes, the on-set of change is concurrent. Verbs in neither class diverge from one another before there are statis-tically significant differences between the classes. Divergence between the two classes reaches its peak at different points in training – step 3000 for the (i) to Datives and (ii) Motion, step 1000 for (iii) Reciprocal and (iv) spray – load – while verbs within the same class continue to diverge from one another until the end of the training. We note that there are a small number of verbs that are not sig-nificantly more similar to verbs in their canonical class (pink line does not always reach 1.0) than verbs in the comparison class, but that they are also not significantly more similar to verbs in the comparison class (blue line tends to 0). Figure 2 shows three early training steps before and after DJS begins to change. At Step 300, there is already clear separation of within-class (top-left, bottom-right) and out-of-class (top-right, bottom-left) quadrants when DJS starts increasing. This confirms that as soon as DJS increases, i.e., any change in verbal argument structure occurs, class-based distinctions are already evident. 

3.4 Results: Targeted behavioural evaluation 

We perform targeted evaluations with the larger to 

Dative-Motion dataset. Four nouns assigned high probability by the fully trained model for the to 

Dative and Motion classes are tracked: public and 

family , and airport and scene , respectively. For each noun and verb pair, we can derive a probability trajectory, i.e., what is the probability assigned to noun n in contexts with verb v at step 

t. Computing Spearman correlations across these trajectories reveals how similar the relative change in probability assigned to n is across verbs, within and across classes. Trajectories for nouns which are prototypical ar-guments of a verb class remain highly correlated between verbs of that class earlier in training ( pub-lic and family for to Dative, airport and scene for Motion). Correlations of noun trajectories for verbs in different classes begin to decrease earlier in train-ing, as well as correlations of noun trajectories for verbs in classes with which they are not prototypi-cally found ( airport and scene for to Dative, public 

and family for Motion). Correlations between verbs in different classes are lowest. The sustained higher correlation across verbs for which a noun is prototypically an argument is con-sistent with the claim that general coarse-grained features, e.g., the semantic features associated with a broad verb class, are what is being learned early on in training (see Figure 4). Lower correlations can be interpreted as verb-specific learning, since this means that the relative change in probability mass even differs across verbs in the same class. This does not occur until later in training for a noun’s prototypical verb class. Lastly, correlations do not greatly increase over the course of training suggesting that verb-specific learning does not pre-cede class-general learning. These results further show that LMs have an abstraction-first bias. 

3.5 Exemplar-first baseline 

We confirm that the observed effects are not the result of an exemplar-first mechanism paired with properties of the training data by implementing a baseline for the exemplar-first mechanism. We use count-based vectors as a baseline since they obtain representations for a target verb as a function of the tokens it is observed with and their frequency. Figure 5: Top: Pairwise DJS across two classes in exemplar-first baseline show verb-specific patterns emerge without clear class distinctions. Middle and bottom: Exemplar-first baseline (middle) shows in-creasing divergence between verbs driven by verb-specific learning, before decrease, while GPT-2 is mono-tonic (bottom); baseline between-class mean diver-gences are not consistently greater than in-class means, unlike GPT-2. Shading is 95% CI. 

We compute co-occurrence statistics for each verb in the correct prepositional structure, using the OpenWebText corpus tokenized with the GPT-2 tokenizer and a unidirectional 10 token context window. Stop word tokens like determiners were re-moved. Increasing the number of tokens observed is a proxy for training step. Add-k smoothing (k = 0 .5) is applied to each vector and pairwise 

DJS is reported, as above. Results in Figure 5 are computed for 6.0 × 10 7

(∼90%) of the tokens containing the target verbs and structures. In the exemplar-first baseline, as hypothesized, verbs in the to Dative class diverge from one another as a result of idiosyncratic pat-terns when less data is observed, before converging when more overlapping data is observed. Between-class distances are not greater than in-class dis-tances until the to Dative class converges, unlike with GPT-2 where these classes are differentiated STRUCTURE EXAMPLE SENTENCES                

> TRANSITIVITY
> (n=1000) The truck hadn’t astounded __ The truck hadn’t fallen __
> RELATIVE CLAUSE
> (to Dative; n=824) The person that they sold the land to __ The person thinks that they sold the land to __
> RELATIVE CLAUSE
> (Reciprocal; n=288) The person that Optimus spoke with __ The person thinks that Optimus spoke with __

Table 2: Example structures for Experiment 2. T RANSI - 

> TIVITY

is from BLiMP (Warstadt et al., 2020). 

early and consistently throughout training. This baseline confirms that observed LM learning tra-jectories do not match exemplar-first accounts. 

## 4 Experiment 2: Is learning generally abstraction-driven? 

GPT-2 learns argument structure classes using abstraction-first mechanisms. We investigate if this mechanism is broadly responsible for language learning using the two syntactic phenomena in Ta-ble 2: syntactic subcategorization (T RANSITIVITY )and filler-gap dependencies (R ELATIVE CLAUSE ). The same models are used. 

Trajectories If constructions are learned in tan-dem for classes of lexical items, then we can say that LMs are corresponding with an abstraction-first account. If they learn constructions idiosyn-cratically for individual instances, before gradually generalizing across classes, then LM learning bet-ter corresponds with an exemplar-first account. 

4.1 Data TRANSITIVITY Verbs differ in whether or not they require an object: transitive -intransitive cate-gorization. Transitive verbs require an object and intransitive verbs do not. Prediction distributions in a single frame across different verbs are used to track LMs learning of the category. (2) ... VERB ... __ 

RELATIVE CLAUSE Relative clauses are an ex-ample filler-gap dependency. In these structures, a noun that appears elsewhere in the sentence (the ‘filler’) blocks a noun from surfacing locally to a verb which otherwise requires an object (the ‘gap’). These are structurally-conditioned categories (e.g.,  

> VERB GAP

vs. VERB NO GAP ; Gazdar, 1987; Pollard and Sag, 1994; Steedman and Baldridge, 2011). We compare prediction distributions across two syntactic frames containing the same verb to track whether LMs have learned relative clause struc-tures. We refer to (3) as the relative clause environ-ment and (4) as the matrix environment. Figure 6: Comparing class-level and item-based be-haviour for T RANSITIVITY dataset. 

(3) The person that ... VERB GAP ... __ (4) The person thinks that ... VERB NO GAP ... __ 

Dataset We track learning here by comparing distributions between minimal pairs. For T RAN - 

> SITIVITY

we use minimal pairs from the BLiMP transitive test set (Warstadt et al., 2020). For R EL - 

> ATIVE

CLAUSE , we templatically build minimal pairs using naturalistic data collected for Exper-iment 1. We use the to Dative and Reciprocal classes since both permit human animate objects in the post-preposition position allowing us to create minimal pairs following the syntactic frames in (3) & (4). Example data is provided in Table 2. 

4.2 Setup 

The same paradigm discussed in Section 3.2 is used here, taking DJS over next-token prediction dis-tributions at the target position given two prefixes containing the structures being compared. 

Item learning metric Given pairwise DJS be-tween distributions predicted for a single minimal pair, we measure the emergence of item-specific learning independent of effects of abstractions, e.g., an abstract transitive class or a gap class, as the mean DJS across all minimal pairs in a single con-dition. If in-class DJS increases, then learning has occurred for single examples that are not tied to learning a generalized construction. 

Class learning metric We define class learning here again by taking a mean across the distribu-tions conditioned on prefixes containing the same verb. We take pairwise DJS between all the dis-tributions for each verb and perform a one-tailed Mann-Whitney U-test to determine the proportion of verbs that are significantly more similar to verbs in the same category than to verbs from the oppo-site category. For T RANSITIVITY categorization,   

> Figure 7: Comparing class-level and item-based be-haviour for R ELATIVE CLAUSE datasets.

the verbs in the two categories are non-overlapping. For the R ELATIVE CLAUSE categorization, the two categories contain the same verbs in differ-ent syntactic contexts, e.g., { give no gap , sell no gap ,

grant no gap } and { give gap , sell gap , grant gap }. As be-fore, this measure only increases if LMs treat verbs in the same syntactic category similarly. 

4.3 Results GPT-2 consistently learns via abstraction. 

Across all structures tested, class-general behaviour emerges as soon as any item-based behaviour is ev-ident. Figures 6 and 7 show that an increase in pair-wise DJS between minimal pairs (orange), always occurs with increases in verbs which are systemati-cally more similar to those belonging to the same category, than those which do not (pink). Class-like behaviour does not emerge slowly – learning a construction always corresponds with generaliz-ing that construction across a class of items. This matches our findings for the learning of semantic verb argument structure classes. An unexpected separation into categories at the beginning of training is observed in the relative clause conditions. We confirm that this is due to the token thinks appearing in all non-relative clause sentences by varying between nine embed-ding verbs for each target verb. This reduces the effect (see Appendix B.1, Figure 9). 

Structures are not learned globally. Relative clause filler-gap categories are not learned for all Figure 8: Learning curves for each abstraction plotted for three models trained with different random seeds. 

verbs at once. Rather, they are learned separately for verb classes: pairwise DJS increases for rel-ative clauses containing Reciprocal verbs earlier than for relative clauses containing to Dative verbs. This is confirmed by comparing breakpoints for each verb: the median across verbs for the Re-ciprocal class and the to Dative class are 950 and 1900, respectively, matching the onsets observed in Figure 7. An unpaired t-test confirms that the differences in breakpoints for the two classes are statistically significant ( p < 10 −8). Breakpoints are heuristically computed as the step after which the average DJS for a verb across minimal pairs is consistently at least 0.01 greater than the average of the first 30 steps of training. 

Abstractions are learned sequentially. Across three runs, we see that each of the abstractions emerges with distinct onsets in the same sequence over the course of training (see Figure 8). Before the onset of learning for a given construction, mean 

DJS in each condition does not increase and is around 0. This confirms further that gradual mem-orization does not drive syntactic learning. 

## 5 Discussion 

Sequential emergence of linguistic behaviour can-not be due to shifts in the training data or objective, as this is uniform over standard LM pretraining (see discussion in Chang et al., 2024). It must be the case that behavioural change is due to shifts in model representations or mechanisms. We have shown here that these shifts are best viewed as resulting from learning abstractions , rather than storage of exemplars . Converging evidence comes from Arora et al. (2024), who show that even indi-vidual phenomena involve discrete learning stages. Our results are also consistent with findings from Wilson et al. (2023), who show that LMs can learn abstractions which hold over classes of lexical items by the end of training, the types of abstrac-tions we test here. Wilson et al. further discuss abstractions that are difficult for LMs to learn – future work into the learning trajectories of these phenomena may provide further insight into why LMs are unable to learn them. The order that abstractions emerge in is con-sistent across training runs: syntactic subcatego-rization ( TRANSITIVITY , t < 100), semantic ar-gument structure properties ( VERB CLASSES , t >100), lastly, non-local dependencies ( RELATIVE CLAUSE , t > 1000). Our results differ from Evan-son et al. (2023), who find a similar ordering, but report gradual parallel learning, while we find clear evidence of sequential emergence, though our ex-perimental setup differs as it directly measures ar-gument predictions, rather than using subject-verb agreement as a proxy. Discrete learning stages provide direct support for abstraction-first views of acquisition – the gradual emergence expected under exemplar-first acquisition is not empirically observed. Abstraction-first theories include those which propose that learning complex structures re-quires simpler abstractions to be in place (Lebeaux, 2000; Friedmann et al., 2021; Diercks et al., 2023); the acquisition order we observe is consistent with the predictions of these theories, as well. This be-ing said, acquisition order may in principle also arise from differences in construction frequency, and, as such, cannot be itself an argument for complexity-based theories. The role of frequency effects and abstraction–driven learning biases in determining acquisition order must be teased apart in future work. Despite apparent parallels, a gap between many theories of child language acquisition and the the-ory of LM learning we have presented here is that all abstract linguistic categories learned by LMs are a product of the data observed during training and their inductive biases. The abstraction-first be-haviour observed is not the result of predetermined linguistic features encoded in the model before training, unlike what has been proposed to be the case for humans with, e.g., the mapping between ar-gument positions and semantic roles (Pinker, 1989). Indeed, earlier work has shown that abstractions like argument structure classes are learnable from distributional patterns, albeit with some supervi-sion, (e.g., Lapata, 1999; Schulte im Walde, 2000). 6 Conclusion 

A leading view on how LMs can contribute to our knowledge of human linguistic cognition is as ex-istence proofs : the mechanisms LMs employ to acquire the constructions that they do are in princi-ple possible ways that human learners may arrive at knowledge of those same constructions (Portelance and Jasbi, 2024). As such, what we understand to be the inductive biases of LMs changes the conclu-sions we can draw on the basis of their success. Some have recently discussed that LMs may indeed be an existence proof for exemplar-based models (Ambridge, 2020; Ambridge and Blything, 2024; Goldberg, 2024). For example, Ambridge suggests modern LMs are compatible with a view where linguistic abilities arise via exemplar-storage because the high parameter count of these models in principle allows them to memorize. Following a body of literature that has cautioned against taking connectionist models as inherently undermining symbolic views like the abstraction-first account of learning discussed here (Fodor and Pylyshyn, 1988; Newmeyer, 2003; Mahowald et al., 2020), we consider this to be a testable empirical question. Indeed, our results show that the abstraction-first account is a viable explanation of LM learning. An open question for future work is characterizing the sorts of abstractions that LMs can learn – are LM abstractions best understood at the word-level or a more dynamic construction-level? Evaluating LM behaviour over the course of training may be a fruitful direction for answering questions like these and uncovering more mechanisms underlying their success. 

## Limitations 

Our study is limited by its focus on a single model architecture trained and evaluated on a single lan-guage. This choice was motivated by previous uses of these models in similar studies (see Section 3.1), and constrained by the resource requirements asso-ciated with training and storing model checkpoints. Our dataset can be applied to a wider-range of En-glish models and the paradigm across languages. These studies will help us understand how general the effects we report here are. Further testing on different models may help localise whether this is an effect of the model architecture and training pro-cedure and testing on models of different sizes can answer whether parameter count has an effect as well. The other limitation that we identify here is the breadth of the linguistic phenomena studied. While we have focused on abstraction within the verbal domain, abstraction occurs at different lev-els of linguistic representation, including below the word level. Derivational suffixes like English 

-ness which can combine with a range of adjectives to derive nouns is another example of abstraction – here, over syntactic categories. Whether LMs can productively combine and use such suffixes and whether this displays the same abstraction-first learning that we observe here would be an interest-ing avenue for future work. Lastly, while we have provided converging 

behavioural evidence in favour of abstraction-first learning, understanding how representations 

change to produce these behaviours is a core desideratum. We hope that our datasets may be helpful for future studies along these lines. 

## Acknowledgements 

The authors would like to thank the three anony-mous reviewers for constructive feedback, as well as Dan Jurafsky, Alex Warstadt, Beth Levin, Boris Harizanov, and members of the Stanford NLP group for much discussion. JJ is supported in part by funding from the Social Sciences and Humani-ties Research Council of Canada. 

## References           

> Kirsten Abbot-Smith, Elena Lieven, and Michael Tomasello. 2001. What preschool children do and do not do with ungrammatical word orders. Cognitive Development , 16(2):679–692. Kirsten Abbot-Smith and Michael Tomasello. 2006. Exemplar-learning and schematization in a usage-based account of syntactic acquisition. The Linguis-tic Review , 23(3):275–290. Ben Ambridge. 2020. Against stored abstractions: A radical exemplar model of language acquisition. First Language , 40(5-6):509–559. Ben Ambridge and Liam Blything. 2024. Large lan-guage models are better than theoretical linguists at theoretical linguistics. Theoretical Linguistics , 50(1-2):33–48. Ben Ambridge and Elena Lieven. 2015. A Construc-tivist Account of Child Language Acquisition , chap-ter 22. John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Richard Antonello and Emily Cheng. 2024. Evidence from fmri supports a two-phase abstraction process in language models. In UniReps: 2nd Edition of

the Workshop on Unifying Representations in Neural Models .Aryaman Arora, Dan Jurafsky, and Christopher Potts. 2024. CausalGym: Benchmarking causal inter-pretability methods on linguistic tasks. In Proceed-ings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Pa-pers) , pages 14638–14663, Bangkok, Thailand. As-sociation for Computational Linguistics. Devansh Arpit, Stanisław Jastrz˛ ebski, Nicolas Ballas, David Krueger, Emmanuel Bengio, Maxinder S Kan-wal, Tegan Maharaj, Asja Fischer, Aaron Courville, Yoshua Bengio, and 1 others. 2017. A closer look at memorization in deep networks. In International con-ference on machine learning , pages 233–242. PMLR. Melissa Bowerman. 1982. Evaluating competing lin-guistic models with language acquisition data: Impli-cations of developmental errors with causative verbs. 

Quaderni di semantica , 3:5–66. Joan Bybee. 2006. From usage to grammar: The mind’s response to repetition. Language , 82(4):711–733. Nicholas Carlini, Daphne Ippolito, Matthew Jagielski, Katherine Lee, Florian Tramer, and Chiyuan Zhang. 2023. Quantifying memorization across neural lan-guage models. In The Eleventh International Confer-ence on Learning Representations .Nicholas Carlini, Chang Liu, Úlfar Erlingsson, Jernej Kos, and Dawn Song. 2019. The secret sharer: Eval-uating and testing unintended memorization in neu-ral networks. In 28th USENIX security symposium (USENIX security 19) , pages 267–284. Tyler A. Chang and Benjamin K. Bergen. 2022. Word acquisition in neural language models. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics ,10:1–16. Tyler A. Chang, Zhuowen Tu, and Benjamin K. Bergen. 2024. Characterizing learning curves during lan-guage model pre-training: Learning, forgetting, and stability. Transactions of the Association for Compu-tational Linguistics , 12:1346–1362. Angelica Chen, Ravid Shwartz-Ziv, Kyunghyun Cho, Matthew L Leavitt, and Naomi Saphra. 2024. Sudden drops in the loss: Syntax acquisition, phase transi-tions, and simplicity bias in MLMs. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representa-tions .Leshem Choshen, Guy Hacohen, Daphna Weinshall, and Omri Abend. 2022. The grammar-learning tra-jectories of neural language models. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) ,pages 8281–8297, Dublin, Ireland. Association for Computational Linguistics. Verna Dankers and Ivan Titov. 2024. Generalisation first, memorisation second? memorisation localisa-tion for natural language classification tasks. In Find-ings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2024 , pages 14348–14366, Bangkok, Thailand. Association for Computational Linguistics. Michael Diercks, Katherine Johnson, Galia Bar-Sever, and Madeline Bossi. 2023. Developmental minimal-ist syntax. Lingbuzz/007134. David Dowty. 2003. The dual analysis of ad-juncts/complements in categorial grammar. In Ewald Lang, Claudia Maienborn, and Cathry Fabricius-Hansen, editors, Modifying Adjuncts , pages 33–66. Mouton de Gruyter, Berlin. Linnea Evanson, Yair Lakretz, and Jean Rémi King. 2023. Language acquisition: do children and lan-guage models follow similar learning stages? In 

Findings of the Association for Computational Lin-guistics: ACL 2023 , pages 12205–12218, Toronto, Canada. Association for Computational Linguistics. Cynthia Fisher, Kyong-sun Jin, and Rose M. Scott. 2020. The developmental origins of syntactic bootstrapping. 

Topics in Cognitive Science , 12(1):48–77. Jerry A. Fodor and Zenon W. Pylyshyn. 1988. Connec-tionism and cognitive architecture: A critical analysis. 

Cognition , 28(1):3–71. Naama Friedmann, Adriana Belletti, and Luigi Rizzi. 2021. Growing trees: The acquisition of the left periphery. Glossa: a journal of general linguistics ,6(1). Gerald Gazdar. 1987. Unbounded dependencies and coordinate structure. In Walter J. Savitch, Emmon Bach, William Marsh, and Gila Safran-Naveh, edi-tors, The Formal Complexity of Natural Language ,pages 183–226. Springer Netherlands, Dordrecht. Lila Gleitman. 1990. The structural sources of verb meanings. Language Acquisition: A Journal of De-velopmental Linguistics , 1(1):3–55. Aaron Gokaslan, Vanya Cohen, Ellie Pavlick, and Ste-fanie Tellex. 2019. Openwebtext corpus. http: //Skylion007.github.io/OpenWebTextCorpus .Adele E Goldberg. 2024. Usage-based constructionist approaches and large language models. Construc-tions and Frames .Yoav Goldberg. 2019. Assessing BERT’s syntactic abil-ities. arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.05287 .Kristina Gulordava, Piotr Bojanowski, Edouard Grave, Tal Linzen, and Marco Baroni. 2018. Colorless green recurrent networks dream hierarchically. In Proceed-ings of the 2018 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-guistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long Papers) , pages 1195–1205, New Orleans, Louisiana. Association for Computational Linguis-tics. Sophie Hao and Tal Linzen. 2023. Verb conjugation in transformers is determined by linear encodings of subject number. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2023 , pages 4531–4539, Singapore. Association for Computa-tional Linguistics. Jing Huang, Diyi Yang, and Christopher Potts. 2024. Demystifying verbatim memorization in large lan-guage models. In Proceedings of the 2024 Confer-ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-cessing , pages 10711–10732, Miami, Florida, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics. Jasper Jian and Siva Reddy. 2023. Syntactic substi-tutability as unsupervised dependency syntax. In Pro-ceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Meth-ods in Natural Language Processing , pages 2341– 2360, Singapore. Association for Computational Lin-guistics. Julie Kallini, Isabel Papadimitriou, Richard Futrell, Kyle Mahowald, and Christopher Potts. 2024. Mis-sion: Impossible language models. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) ,pages 14691–14714, Bangkok, Thailand. Association for Computational Linguistics. Siddharth Karamcheti, Laurel Orr, Jason Bolton, Tianyi Zhang, Karan Goel, Avanika Narayan, Rishi Bom-masani, Deepak Narayanan, Tatsunori Hashimoto, Dan Jurafsky, Christopher D. Manning, Christopher Potts, Christopher Ré, and Percy Liang. 2021. Mis-tral - a journey towards reproducible language model training. Najoung Kim and Tal Linzen. 2020. COGS: A compo-sitional generalization challenge based on semantic interpretation. In Proceedings of the 2020 Confer-ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) , pages 9087–9105, Online. As-sociation for Computational Linguistics. Najoung Kim and Paul Smolensky. 2021. Testing for grammatical category abstraction in neural language models. In Proceedings of the Society for Compu-tation in Linguistics 2021 , pages 467–470, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics. Brenden Lake and Marco Baroni. 2018. Generalization without systematicity: On the compositional skills of sequence-to-sequence recurrent networks. In Pro-ceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning , volume 80 of Proceedings of Ma-chine Learning Research , pages 2873–2882. PMLR. Barbara Landau and Lila R. Gleitman. 1985. Language and Experience: Evidence from the Blind Child . Har-vard University Press, Cambridge, MA. Maria Lapata. 1999. Acquiring lexical generalizations from corpora: A case study for diathesis alternations. In Proceedings of the 37th Annual Meeting of the As-sociation for Computational Linguistics , pages 397– 404, College Park, Maryland, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics. Karim Lasri, Alessandro Lenci, and Thierry Poibeau. 2022. Does BERT really agree ? fine-grained anal-ysis of lexical dependence on a syntactic task. In 

Findings of the Association for Computational Lin-guistics: ACL 2022 , pages 2309–2315, Dublin, Ire-land. Association for Computational Linguistics. David Lebeaux. 2000. Language acquisition and the form of the grammar . John Benjamins Publishing Company. Beth Levin. 1993. English verb classes and alterna-tions: A preliminary investigation . University of Chicago press. Elena VM Lieven, Julian M Pine, and Gillian Bald-win. 1997. Lexically-based learning and early gram-matical development. Journal of child language ,24(1):187–219. J. Lin. 1991. Divergence measures based on the Shan-non entropy. IEEE Transactions on Information The-ory , 37(1):145–151. Zeyu Liu, Yizhong Wang, Jungo Kasai, Hannaneh Ha-jishirzi, and Noah A. Smith. 2021. Probing across time: What does RoBERTa know and when? In 

Findings of the Association for Computational Lin-guistics: EMNLP 2021 , pages 820–842, Punta Cana, Dominican Republic. Association for Computational Linguistics. Kyle Mahowald, George Kachergis, and Michael C Frank. 2020. What counts as an exemplar model, anyway? A commentary on Ambridge (2020). First Language , 40(5-6):608–611. Henry B Mann and Donald R Whitney. 1947. On a test of whether one of two random variables is stochasti-cally larger than the other. The annals of mathemati-cal statistics , pages 50–60. Rebecca Marvin and Tal Linzen. 2018. Targeted syn-tactic evaluation of language models. In Proceed-ings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 1192–1202, Brussels, Belgium. Association for Computational Linguistics. Stephen Merity, Caiming Xiong, James Bradbury, and Richard Socher. 2016. Pointer sentinel mixture mod-els. arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.07843 .Kanishka Misra and Najoung Kim. 2023. Abstraction via exemplars? A representational case study on lexi-cal category inference in BERT. In BUCLD 48: Pro-ceedings of the 48th annual Boston University Con-ference on Language Development , Boston, USA. Kanishka Misra and Kyle Mahowald. 2024. Language models learn rare phenomena from less rare phenom-ena: The case of the missing AANNs. In Proceed-ings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 913–929, Mi-ami, Florida, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics. Letitia Naigles. 1990. Children use syntax to learn verb meanings. Journal of child language , 17(2):357– 374. Benjamin Newman, Kai-Siang Ang, Julia Gong, and John Hewitt. 2021. Refining targeted syntactic evalu-ation of language models. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies , pages 3710–3723, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics. Frederick J Newmeyer. 2003. Grammar is grammar and usage is usage. Language , 79(4):682–707. Byung-Doh Oh and William Schuler. 2023. Why does surprisal from larger transformer-based language models provide a poorer fit to human reading times? 

Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics , 11:336–350. Isabel Papadimitriou, Richard Futrell, and Kyle Ma-howald. 2022. When classifying grammatical role, BERT doesn’t care about word order... except when it matters. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meet-ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Papers) , pages 636–643, Dublin, Ireland. Association for Computational Linguistics. Abhinav Patil, Jaap Jumelet, Yu Ying Chiu, Andy La-pastora, Peter Shen, Lexie Wang, Clevis Willrich, and Shane Steinert-Threlkeld. 2024. Filtered corpus training (FiCT) shows that language models can gen-eralize from indirect evidence. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics , 12:1597– 1615. Steven Pinker. 1989. Learnability and Cognition: The Acquisition of Argument Structure . MIT Press, Cam-bridge, MA. Carl Pollard and Ivan A. Sag. 1994. Head-Driven Phrase Structure Grammar . CSLI Publications, Stan-ford, CA. Eva Portelance and Masoud Jasbi. 2024. The roles of neural networks in language acquisition. Language and Linguistics Compass , 18(6):e70001. Christopher Potts. 2024. Characterizing English Prepos-ing in PP constructions. Journal of Linguistics , pages 1–39. Peng Qi, Yuhao Zhang, Yuhui Zhang, Jason Bolton, and Christopher D Manning. 2020. Stanza: A Python natural language processing toolkit for many human languages. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.07082 .Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, and Ilya Sutskever. 2019. Language models are unsupervised multitask learners. Techni-cal report, OpenAI. Rylan Schaeffer, Brando Miranda, and Sanmi Koyejo. 2023. Are emergent abilities of large language mod-els a mirage? In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neu-ral Information Processing Systems .Sabine Schulte im Walde. 2000. Clustering verbs se-mantically according to their alternation behaviour. In COLING 2000 Volume 2: The 18th International Conference on Computational Linguistics .Mark Steedman and Jason Baldridge. 2011. Combina-tory categorial grammar. In Non-Transformational Syntax , chapter 5, pages 181–224. John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Tristan Thrush, Ethan Wilcox, and Roger Levy. 2020. Investigating novel verb learning in BERT: Selec-tional preference classes and alternation-based syn-tactic generalization. In Proceedings of the Third BlackboxNLP Workshop on Analyzing and Interpret-ing Neural Networks for NLP , pages 265–275, On-line. Association for Computational Linguistics. Kushal Tirumala, Aram Markosyan, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Armen Aghajanyan. 2022. Memorization with-out overfitting: Analyzing the training dynamics of large language models. Advances in Neural Informa-tion Processing Systems , 35:38274–38290. Michael Tomasello. 1992. First verbs: A case study of early grammatical development . Cambridge Univer-sity Press. Michael Tomasello. 2003. Constructing a Language: A Usage-Based Theory of Language Acquisition. Har-vard University Press. Alex Warstadt, Alicia Parrish, Haokun Liu, Anhad Mo-hananey, Wei Peng, Sheng-Fu Wang, and Samuel R. Bowman. 2020. BLiMP: The benchmark of linguis-tic minimal pairs for English. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics , 8:377– 392. Ethan Wilcox, Roger Levy, and Richard Futrell. 2019. Hierarchical representation in neural language mod-els: Suppression and recovery of expectations. In 

Proceedings of the 2019 ACL Workshop Black-boxNLP: Analyzing and Interpreting Neural Net-works for NLP , pages 181–190, Florence, Italy. As-sociation for Computational Linguistics. Ethan Gotlieb Wilcox, Richard Futrell, and Roger Levy. 2024. Using Computational Models to Test Syntactic Learnability. Linguistic Inquiry , 55(4):805–848. Michael Wilson, Jackson Petty, and Robert Frank. 2023. How abstract is linguistic generalization in large lan-guage models? experiments with argument structure. 

Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics , 11:1377–1395. Yi Yang, Yiming Wang, and Jiahong Yuan. 2025. Transformer-based speech model learns well as in-fants and encodes abstractions through exemplars in the poverty of the stimulus environment. In Proceed-ings of the 31st International Conference on Compu-tational Linguistics , pages 7881–7890, Abu Dhabi, UAE. Association for Computational Linguistics. A Datasets: A RGUMENT STRUCTURE 

## CLASSES 

Verbs used for each argument structure class: 

to Dative sell (85), grant (85), issue (84), ex-plain (81), lease (79), award (79), deny (79), teach 

(75), present (75), offer (75), allocate (74), give 

(66), assign (65), pass (65), read (63), relay (62), 

show (62), cede (62), pay (56), trade (52), deliver 

(51), feed (49), rent (48), transfer (43), forward 

(33), promise (30), mail (28), allot (27), tell (26), 

guarantee (24), yield (18), dictate (16), ask (12), 

bequeath (7), refund (5). (Levin, 1993; p.45-46) 

Motion go (130), travel (124), walk (119), fly 

(116), flee (114), sail (111), rush (108), descend 

(95), cross (94), run (93), march (93), climb (83), 

swim (77), ascend (76), drift (70), ride (65), arrive 

(56), hurry (49), race (36), float (32), journey (29), 

depart (19), crawl (16), row (15), taxi (14), hasten 

(12), limp (11), chase (11), glide (11), hike (10), 

dash (10), wander (10), scramble (9), cycle (8), 

tumble (8), meander (8). (Levin, 1993; p.263-269) 

Reciprocal collaborate (48), team (47), talk (46), 

mate (44), communicate (41), compete (39), clash 

(35), join (35), meet (30), cooperate (28), speak 

(19), correspond (16), fight (15), connect (10), 

agree (8), play (4). (Levin, 1993; p.59) 

spray -load inject (93), load (66), stock (63), 

plant (31), spray (31), stuff (22), pack (20), hang 

(15), smear (12), rub (11), plaster (10), shower 

(10), scatter (7), sprinkle (7), drape (6). (Levin, 1993; p.50) Each class is uniform with respect to a broad categorization of argument preferences structure. Future work may investigate how finer-grained dis-tinctions that we do not assess here, e.g., participa-tion in argument structure alternations, are learned over the course of training. 

## B Datasets: R ELATIVE CLAUSE 

The R ELATIVE CLAUSE datasets were automati-cally generated using the sentences collected for each verb class for Experiment 1. Experiment 1 does not restrict sentences collected to being a full finite clause with a subject and active voice verb, so Stanza parses are used to extract the subject (and the direct object of the verb for to Dative class). Sentences for which the sequence of words extracted for the subject and object were not con-tiguous, or for which one of the required arguments   

> Figure 9: Comparing class-level and item-based be-haviour on R ELATIVE CLAUSE datasets with varied embedding verbs.

could not be extracted on the basis of the parse tree, were discarded, accounting for the decrease in the number of sentences between the full dataset and the derived relative clause dataset. Verbs were converted to a simple past form and placed in two different syntactic templates with its extracted subject and object, corresponding to the relative clause (5)-(6) and non-relative clause (7)-(8) structures being compared in this condition. (5) The person that SUBJECT V-ED OBJ to __. (6) The person that SUBJECT V-ED with __. (7) The person thinks that SUBJECT V-ED OBJ 

to __. (8) The person thinks that SUBJECT V-ED with __. 

B.1 Alternating embedding verbs 

In order to construct minimal pairs with the relative clause condition that should not license a filler-gap dependency that contain the relativized noun the person and the complementizer that , we embed tar-get sentences under the verb think , as shown above. However, this introduces an additional word not 

present in the relative clause condition, the embed-ding verb think itself. This can cause an unexpected differentiation between conditions early on in train-ing (see Figure 7). We confirm that this is the effect of the presence of the word think itself and not early syntactic learning by varying the embedding verbs: 

thinks , believes , knows , says , claims , announces ,

states , reports , reveals . They occupy the position of thinks in (7) & (8). Figure 9 shows that the spike observed in Figure 7 at early steps is no longer present. 

## C Compute, Packages, and Licenses 

Experiments reported used NLTK (3.6.4), lemmin-flect (0.2.3), and Stanza (1.8.2) for preprocessing and parsing during the creation of the dataset; trans-formers (4.40.1), scipy (1.3.1), numpy (1.18.2) and SpaCy (2.1.8) were used for computational experi-ments. All experiments were run on NVIDIA RTX or NVIDIA RTX A6000 GPUs depending on clus-ter availability. All data (WikiText-103, Merity et al., 2016; BLiMP, Warstadt et al., 2020) and pretrained mod-els (GPT-2 checkpoints, Karamcheti et al., 2021) are freely available for download and were used standardly. Our dataset and code can be found at 

https://github.com/jasperjjian/abstraction .