Title: Dual-View Training for Instruction-Following Information Retrieval

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.18845v1

Published Time: Wed, 22 Apr 2026 00:23:56 GMT

Number of Pages: 6

Markdown Content:
## Dual-View Training for Instruction-Following Information Retrieval 

Qingcheng Zeng †,*, Puxuan Yu †, Aman Mehta †, Fuheng Zhao †, Rajhans Samdani †∗Northwestern University †Snowflake Inc. 

Abstract 

Instruction-following information retrieval (IF-IR) studies retrieval systems that must not only find documents relevant to a query, but also obey explicit user constraints such as required attributes, exclusions, or output preferences. However, most retrievers are trained primar-ily for semantic relevance and often fail to dis-tinguish documents that match the topic from those that satisfy the instruction. We propose a dual-view data synthesis strategy based on polarity reversal: given a query, a document that is relevant under the instruction, and a hard negative that matches the query but violates the instruction, we prompt an LLM to generate a complementary instruction under which the two documents swap relevance labels. By pre-senting the same document pair under comple-mentary instructions that invert their relevance labels, the training signal forces the retriever to reconsider the same candidate set through the instruction, rather than relying on fixed topical cues. On a 305M-parameter encoder, our method improves performance on the Fol-lowIR benchmark by 45%, surpassing general-purpose embedding models of comparable or larger scale. Through head-to-head compar-isons at matched data budgets, we further show that data diversity and instruction supervision play complementary roles: the former pre-serves general retrieval quality, while the latter improves instruction sensitivity. These results highlight the value of targeted data synthesis for building retrieval systems that are both broadly capable and instruction-aware. 

1 Introduction 

Instruction-following information retrieval extends traditional semantic matching by requiring systems to adhere to both a query and explicit user-defined constraints that specify relevance criteria (Su et al., 2023; Weller et al., 2025a). For instance, a user might not only submit a query but also specify that 

> *

Work done during internship at Snowflake Inc. Query     

> Which type of volcano eruption has not been seen?
> Original Instruction
> Volcanoes are classified into different types based on their shape and eruption style. A document is relevant if it describes a specific type of volcano that has not been directly observed erupting ,and provides information about its formation or characteristics.
> New Instruction
> Select documents that discuss the broader environmental impacts or research insights associated with unwitnessed eruption types ,strictly excluding descriptions of the volcano's physical formation or structural classification.
> Original Instruction Positive
> Subglacial Volcanoes: Unseen Eruptions Subglacial volcanoes, which erupt beneath ice sheets or glaciers, have not been directly observed erupting. These volcanoes are formed when ....
> New Instruction Negative
> Original Instruction Negative
> Impact of Volcanic Eruptions on Climate Volcanic eruptions can have significant impacts on the climate ... e.g. the eruption of Mount Tambora ... there are some types of eruptions that have not been witnessed first hand, which could provide further insights...
> New Instruction Positive

Figure 1: We synthesize new instructions that reverse the relevance polarity of existing documents, creating challenging samples that sharpen the retriever’s sensi-tivity to instructional nuances. 

relevant documents must discuss a particular as-pect, be written in a certain style, or satisfy length requirements. This paradigm rigorously tests the capacity of dense retrievers to adapt their behav-ior based on dynamic in-context directives, going beyond static notions of relevance. Despite the growing number of instruction-aware retrievers, critical limitations persist. Weller et al. (2025a) conducted a systematic evaluation using human-annotated instructions that fundamen-tally alter relevance definitions. By quantifying sensitivity to instruction changes with the p-MRR metric, which measures whether a retriever ranks the preferred document higher when the instruc-tion changes, their findings reveal that most current models fail to internalize detailed relevance criteria, relying instead on superficial query-document sim-ilarity and largely ignoring the specific constraints imposed by instructions. To address this, Weller et al. (2025b) introduced a training paradigm centered on instruction neg-atives , documents that are semantically relevant to the query but become irrelevant once a specific instruction is applied. While their results demon-strate the effectiveness of instruction negatives over standard hard negatives, these negatives carry ad-1

> arXiv:2604.18845v1 [cs.IR] 20 Apr 2026

ditional untapped potential: each one implicitly defines a complementary instruction under which it becomes the relevant document. In this paper, we exploit this observation by prompting an LLM to synthesize such complementary instructions that reverse the relevance polarity of existing docu-ment pairs (Figure 1). The same documents are thus repurposed under two complementary views, compelling the retriever to attend to fine-grained instructional differences rather than surface-level query-document similarity. We make three contributions. (1) We propose a simple polarity-reversal synthesis strategy that improves FollowIR p-MRR by 45% on a 305M-parameter encoder, surpassing general-purpose em-bedding models of comparable or larger scale. (2) Through head-to-head comparisons at matched data budgets, we identify a fundamental tension in IF training: data diversity sustains general re-trieval quality while instruction supervision drives IF capability, but supplementing with non-instruct data may dilute the instruction signal and hurt IF performance. (3) We show that dual-view synthe-sis resolves this tension, simultaneously improving instruction sensitivity and general retrieval at equal data budget. All findings are validated across two encoder backbones. 

2 Methodology 

As illustrated in Figure 1, our approach leverages LLMs to generate complementary instructions that invert the ground truth labels for a fixed set of doc-uments. Formally, given a query q, a positive doc-ument D+, and an instruction negative document 

D− under an original instruction Iorig , we prompt the LLM to synthesize a new instruction Inew . The generation is constrained such that Inew must be se-mantically coherent with q but sufficiently distinct from Iorig so that D− becomes the relevant doc-ument (positive) and D+ becomes an instruction negative. This creates a “dual-view” training sce-nario where the relevance of a document depends entirely on the specific constraints of the instruc-tion, not on its text or the query alone. By requiring the model to retrieve opposite documents for the same query under different instructions, this setup discourages reliance on fixed query-document as-sociations and encourages generalization across diverse instruction types. During contrastive training, each query is paired with its positive document and a set of negatives. For datapoints augmented with our method, the training batch contains both the original and the polarity-reversed view. The model must therefore learn to assign high similarity to (q ⊕ Iorig , D +)

and (q ⊕ Inew , D −) simultaneously, while pushing the reversed assignments apart. This dual objective directly penalizes instruction-agnostic representa-tions: no single query encoding can satisfy both constraints unless it genuinely conditions on the semantic content of the instruction, since q ⊕ Iorig 

and q ⊕ Inew must retrieve opposite documents. 

Data Synthesis Setup We employ Qwen3-Next-80B-A3B-Instruct (Qwen Team, 2025) as the back-bone LLM for our data synthesis pipeline. We construct our seed dataset by selecting instances from the promptriever data that contain at least one pre-existing instruction negative. For each of these data points, we generate a new instruction that re-verses the roles of the positive document and the instruction negative. This process yields one com-plementary training sample per original instance. In our controlled experiments, DV samples sub-stitute for an equal-sized portion of the training set rather than being added on top, enabling size-matched comparisons across all configurations. Af-ter synthesis, one annotator manually checked 100 datapoints and confirmed that over 99% of the DV instructions are usable. Thus, no additional filter-ing was conducted. The specific prompt template used for this generation is provided in Appendix A. 

3 Experimental Setup 

Backbone Models We adopt gte-multilingual-mlm-base (Zhang et al., 2024) (305M parameters) as our primary encoder, initialized from our own contrastively pretrained checkpoint trained on 1.41 billion unsupervised query-document pairs from C4 (Raffel et al., 2020), mC4 (Habernal et al., 2016), CC News, and multilingual Wikipedia. To assess cross-backbone generalizability, we addi-tionally train bge-m3-retromae (Chen et al., 2024) under the same data configurations and report re-sults in Table 2. • Ins-orig : 480k instruct samples from the orig-inal Promptriever dataset. • Ins-DV (ours): 240k original instruct sam-ples + 240k dual-view synthetic samples (size-matched to Ins-orig). • All-orig : 440k instruct samples + their 440k non-instruct counterparts from the original Promptriever dataset (each instruct sample 2was synthesized from a corresponding non-instruct sample). • All-DV (ours): 440k original instruct sam-ples + 440k dual-view synthetic samples (size-matched to All-orig). 

Training Details We use the Arctic-Embed framework 1 with 30 hard negatives per query, in-cluding 1–3 instruction negatives. We optimize with InfoNCE loss (van den Oord et al., 2019) with temperature τ = 0 .02 . For both encoders, the query and instruction are concatenated before encoding, while documents are encoded indepen-dently. The maximum sequence length is 512 to-kens for both queries and documents. All config-urations use the same training protocol to ensure fair comparisons. 

Evaluation Benchmarks We evaluate on three benchmark suites: (1) FollowIR (Weller et al., 2025a), reporting p-MRR for instruction sensitiv-ity and an aggregated Score for overall retrieval quality. The p-MRR metric quantifies instruction sensitivity by comparing a model’s ranking under two paired instructions: one where a document is annotated as relevant and one where it is not. Positive p-MRR indicates the model correctly ad-justs its ranking in response to instruction changes, while negative values indicate it ranks documents in the opposite direction. (2) InfoSearch (Zhou et al., 2025) length and keyword subsets, also re-porting p-MRR; and (3) MAIR (Sun et al., 2024) IFEval (Zhou et al., 2023) and InstructIR (Oh et al., 2024) subsets, reporting nDCG@10. 

4 Results and Analysis 

Table 1 summarizes results across all benchmarks. We organize our analysis around two experimen-tal comparisons that together reveal the interplay between instruction sensitivity and data diversity. 

Instruct-only comparison: IF gains at the cost of general retrieval. In the size-matched compari-son between Ins-DV and Ins-orig ( ∼480k samples each), our DV data yields consistent gains across all IF metrics: FollowIR p-MRR increases from 5.21 to 7.57 (+45%), surpassing general-purpose models such as EmbeddingGemma-300M (5.61 p-MRR) (Vera et al., 2025) and Qwen3-Embedding-0.6B (5.09 p-MRR) (Zhang et al., 2025); InfoSearch 

p-MRR improves by +122% (length) and +172% 

> 1https://github.com/snowflakedb/ArcticTraining

(keyword); and MAIR IFEval rises from 32.14 to 36.13. However, FollowIR Score drops from 21.33 to 19.73. Since Ins-DV replaces half of the original instruct samples with DV counterparts, the model sees fewer unique training contexts, which may ac-count for this decline. This observation points to data diversity as a key factor in sustaining general retrieval performance, a hypothesis we test directly in the All- configurations below. 

Mixed-data comparison: All-orig vs. All-syn. 

The All- configurations compare two strategies for scaling the training set to ∼880k while holding the instruct portion fixed ( ∼440k): supplementing with non-instruct data (All-orig) versus DV data (All-DV). Across all benchmarks, All-DV outper-forms All-orig. FollowIR p-MRR improves from 5.27 to 8.30, the highest among all configurations, and Score rises from 20.85 to 21.38. On InfoS-earch, All-DV achieves positive p-MRR (31.91 length, 12.13 keyword) whereas All-orig falls into negative territory ( −23 .22 , −49 .65 ), indicating that the model with non-instruct supplementation contradicts instruction-defined relevance. MAIR metrics follow the same pattern: All-DV reaches 34.08 (IFEval) and 90.74 (InstructIR), both the best across all settings. 

The role of data diversity. These results, com-bined with the Ins- comparison, clarify the respec-tive roles of data diversity and instruction super-vision. The Ins- experiments show that dedicated instruction data drives IF capability, but replacing original samples with DV ones reduces diversity and costs general retrieval quality. The All- ex-periments reveal the converse: scaling with non-instruct data provides diversity but dilutes the in-struction signal, severely degrading IF while offer-ing only marginal general retrieval benefit over Ins-orig. All-DV achieves the best of both by provid-ing instruction-conditioned training pairs at scale, simultaneously maintaining the data volume that sustains general quality and the instruction signal that drives IF capability. Notably, All-DV contains no non-instruct data, yet achieves the best Score across all configurations. This suggests that data volume, rather than source heterogeneity per se, is the primary driver of general retrieval quality, as long as individual training samples are sufficiently diverse in their query-document pairings. 

Cross-backbone generalizability. Table 2 re-ports results on bge-m3-retromae , a stronger en-3Training data FollowIR InfoSearch (p-MRR) MAIR (nDCG@10) p-MRR ↑ Score ↑ Length ↑ Keyword ↑ IFEval ↑ InstructIR ↑                        

> Ins-orig 5.21 21.33 4.06 2.06 32.14 89.16 Ins-DV (ours) 7.57 19.73 9.02 5.61 36.13 87.97 All-orig 5.27 20.85 -23.22 -49.65 24.33 85.54 All-DV (ours) 8.30 21.38 31.91 12.13 34.08 90.74

Table 1: Main results on instruction-following retrieval benchmarks. Ins-/All- denote instruct-only and mixed training regimes; -orig/-DV denote original and our dual-view augmented data. Score is the macro-average across three FollowIR subsets (MAP@1000 on two subsets; nDCG@5 on one). Negative p-MRR indicates the model 

contradicts instruction-defined relevance.                                       

> Training data FollowIR InfoSearch (p-MRR) MAIR (nDCG@10) p-MRR ↑Score ↑Length ↑Keyword ↑IFEval ↑InstructIR ↑
> Ins-orig 9.40 22.26 19.00 4.18 27.12 90.40 Ins-DV (ours) 11.47 19.76 28.64 48.42 29.37 89.53 All-orig 8.84 20.69 -27.08 -62.04 25.68 90.67 All-DV (ours) 13.92 20.99 40.15 49.62 27.07 90.80

Table 2: Results on bge-m3-retromae . Score is computed identically to Table 1. The same patterns hold: DV data improves IF, mixing non-instruct data degrades it, and DV augmentation counteracts this degradation. 

coder with a different pretraining strategy. Both experimental patterns replicate faithfully. In the Ins- comparison, Ins-DV improves all IF metrics: FollowIR p-MRR rises from 9.40 to 11.47 (+22%), InfoSearch keyword p-MRR surges from 4.18 to 48.42, while Score drops from 22.26 to 19.76, con-firming the same IF/diversity trade-off. In the All-comparison, the same degradation pattern reap-pears with All-orig ( −27 .08 and −62 .04 on InfoS-earch), and All-DV again reverses it entirely (40.15 and 49.62), achieving the best FollowIR p-MRR of 13.92 while maintaining competitive Score (20.99). The magnitude of the keyword gains is consider-ably larger on bge-m3, suggesting that a stronger backbone amplifies the benefit of our DV signal. The cross-model consistency confirms that both the DV method and the data mixing degradation are backbone-agnostic phenomena, reinforcing the generality of our findings. 

5 Discussion 

Polarity reversal versus instruction-based neg-atives. Both Promptriever (Weller et al., 2025b) and InF-IR (Zhuang et al., 2025) demonstrate that instruction-tied negatives outperform generic hard negatives, but treat negatives as fixed failures rel-ative to a given instruction, i.e., documents that should not be retrieved under it. Polarity reversal reframes this: an instruction negative is a condition-ally relevant document, one that should be retrieved under a different, complementary instruction. Syn-thesizing this complement imposes a contrastive constraint across instruction space, requiring the query encoder to resolve where Iorig and Inew di-verge, not just which documents each instruction excludes. This targets instructional distinctions rather than instructional exclusions, a structurally richer supervisory signal. 

A gradient perspective on data mixing. The data mixing catastrophe offers a mechanistic expla-nation for why general-purpose embedding models often underperform instruction-specialized ones despite larger scale. Non-instruct samples provide gradient signal that rewards query-correlated re-trieval regardless of instructions; at a 50/50 mix, this overwhelms the instruction signal. Instruc-tion sensitivity is therefore not a capability that accumulates with scale but a fragile property re-quiring consistent supervision. This is consistent with InF-IR (Zhuang et al., 2025), which achieves competitive IF performance from ∼38k specialized triplets, suggesting signal purity matters more than volume. Our DV strategy addresses this by embed-ding an instruction-conditioning signal into every training pair, providing a uniform gradient toward instruction-conditioned representations even in the presence of general-retrieval data. 

6 Conclusion 

We present a dual-view data synthesis strategy based on polarity reversal that creates complemen-4tary training pairs at no additional annotation cost. Experiments across two encoder backbones yield two insights: (1) dedicated instruction data drives IF sensitivity, while data diversity sustains general retrieval quality, and (2) our synthesis reconciles these competing demands, simultaneously improv-ing both dimensions at equal data budget. The approach requires no changes to existing pipelines. 

Limitations 

The polarity-reversal synthesis assumes that a meaningful complementary instruction exists for each data point; in practice, our manual inspection found this to hold for the vast majority of cases, but queries with very narrow relevance criteria may oc-casionally yield less natural reversals. We evaluate on encoder-based bi-encoder retrievers; exploring the applicability to decoder-based or cross-encoder architectures is a natural direction for future work. Additionally, our experiments focus on English-language benchmarks, and extending the approach to multilingual settings remains an interesting av-enue to explore. 

References 

Jianlyu Chen, Shitao Xiao, Peitian Zhang, Kun Luo, Defu Lian, and Zheng Liu. 2024. M3-embedding: Multi-linguality, multi-functionality, multi-granularity text embeddings through self-knowledge distillation. In Findings of the Asso-ciation for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2024 ,pages 2318–2335, Bangkok, Thailand. Association for Computational Linguistics. Ivan Habernal, Omnia Zayed, and Iryna Gurevych. 2016. C4Corpus: Multilingual web-size corpus with free license. In Proceedings of the Tenth International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC’16) , pages 914–922, Portorož, Slovenia. Eu-ropean Language Resources Association (ELRA). Hanseok Oh, Hyunji Lee, Seonghyeon Ye, Haebin Shin, Hansol Jang, Changwook Jun, and Minjoon Seo. 2024. Instructir: A benchmark for instruction fol-lowing of information retrieval models. Preprint ,arXiv:2402.14334. Qwen Team. 2025. Qwen3 technical report. Preprint ,arXiv:2505.09388. Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Kather-ine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J. Liu. 2020. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text transformer. Journal of Machine Learning Research ,21(140):1–67. Hongjin Su, Weijia Shi, Jungo Kasai, Yizhong Wang, Yushi Hu, Mari Ostendorf, Wen-tau Yih, Noah A. Smith, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Tao Yu. 2023. One embedder, any task: Instruction-finetuned text em-beddings. In Findings of the Association for Compu-tational Linguistics: ACL 2023 , pages 1102–1121, Toronto, Canada. Association for Computational Lin-guistics. Weiwei Sun, Zhengliang Shi, Wu Jiu Long, Lingyong Yan, Xinyu Ma, Yiding Liu, Min Cao, Dawei Yin, and Zhaochun Ren. 2024. MAIR: A massive bench-mark for evaluating instructed retrieval. In Proceed-ings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 14044–14067, Miami, Florida, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics. Aaron van den Oord, Yazhe Li, and Oriol Vinyals. 2019. Representation learning with contrastive predictive coding. Preprint , arXiv:1807.03748. Henrique Schechter Vera, Sahil Dua, Biao Zhang, Daniel Salz, Ryan Mullins, Sindhu Raghuram Pa-nyam, Sara Smoot, Iftekhar Naim, Joe Zou, Feiyang Chen, Daniel Cer, Alice Lisak, Min Choi, Lucas Gonzalez, Omar Sanseviero, Glenn Cameron, Ian Ballantyne, Kat Black, Kaifeng Chen, and 70 others. 2025. Embeddinggemma: Powerful and lightweight text representations. Preprint , arXiv:2509.20354. Orion Weller, Benjamin Chang, Sean MacAvaney, Kyle Lo, Arman Cohan, Benjamin Van Durme, Dawn Lawrie, and Luca Soldaini. 2025a. FollowIR: Eval-uating and teaching information retrieval models to follow instructions. In Proceedings of the 2025 Con-ference of the Nations of the Americas Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers) ,pages 11926–11942, Albuquerque, New Mexico. As-sociation for Computational Linguistics. Orion Weller, Ben Van Durme, Dawn Lawrie, Ashwin Paranjape, Yuhao Zhang, and Jack Hessel. 2025b. Promptriever: Instruction-trained retrievers can be prompted like language models. In International Conference on Representation Learning , volume 2025, pages 17660–17683. Xin Zhang, Yanzhao Zhang, Dingkun Long, Wen Xie, Ziqi Dai, Jialong Tang, Huan Lin, Baosong Yang, Pengjun Xie, Fei Huang, Meishan Zhang, Wenjie Li, and Min Zhang. 2024. mGTE: Generalized long-context text representation and reranking models for multilingual text retrieval. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-guage Processing: Industry Track , pages 1393–1412, Miami, Florida, US. Association for Computational Linguistics. Yanzhao Zhang, Mingxin Li, Dingkun Long, Xin Zhang, Huan Lin, Baosong Yang, Pengjun Xie, An Yang, Dayiheng Liu, Junyang Lin, Fei Huang, and Jingren Zhou. 2025. Qwen3 embedding: Advancing text embedding and reranking through foundation models. 

Preprint , arXiv:2506.05176. 

5Jeffrey Zhou, Tianjian Lu, Swaroop Mishra, Siddhartha Brahma, Sujoy Basu, Yi Luan, Denny Zhou, and Le Hou. 2023. Instruction-following evaluation for large language models. Preprint , arXiv:2311.07911. Jianqun Zhou, Yuanlei Zheng, Wei Chen, Qianqian Zheng, Shang Zeyuan, Wei Zhang, Rui Meng, and Xiaoyu Shen. 2025. Beyond content relevance: Eval-uating instruction following in retrieval models. In 

International Conference on Representation Learn-ing , volume 2025, pages 84965–84996. Yuchen Zhuang, Aaron Trinh, Rushi Qiang, Haotian Sun, Chao Zhang, Hanjun Dai, and Bo Dai. 2025. Towards better instruction following retrieval models. 

Preprint , arXiv:2505.21439. 

A The Prompt Template for Data Synthesis 

The following box shows the full prompt template used for polarity-reversed instruction synthesis. Template variables (in monospace ) are populated per instance. 

Goal 

Create a new synthetic instruction that reverses the original relevance judgment only for the specified passages: • The original positive passage (P +) must become an instruction negative under the new instruction (i.e., relevant to the pure query but 

irrelevant once the instruction is applied). • The specific instruction negative (N ⋆) must become the new positive 

(i.e., relevant to the pure query and to the query+instruction). • All remaining instruction negatives (N 1. . . N k ) must remain in-struction negatives .You must not change the query or any passage content. Only write a new instruction. 

Inputs 

• query (string) • original_instruction (string) • positive_passage = P + (string) • specific_instruction_negative = N ⋆ (string) • remaining_instruction_negatives = N 1. . . N k (array; may be empty) 

Output 

You should reason step by step, and the final answer should be in the following XML format: 

<answer> <new_instruction> [your new instruction] </new_instruction> </answer> 

If you think this task is too hard to achieve, you should simply return 

<answer>None</answer> .

Definitions 

• Relevant to the pure query : reasonably satisfies the user’s intent with-out any extra instruction. • Instruction negative : relevant to the pure query, but excluded by the instruction (e.g., by scope, geography, timeframe, format, source constraints, audience level). 

Method 

1) Profile passages 

• Identify attributes of P + (domain, geography, timeframe, audience, medium/format, methodology, sources, constraints). • Identify attributes of N ⋆ that distinguish it from P +.• Skim each N i to note attributes you must keep excluded .2) Choose reversal levers 

Craft a new instruction that: • Positively selects N⋆’s attributes (so N ⋆ becomes positive), and • Excludes P+ via ≥1 hard, objective constraint (so P + becomes an instruction negative), while • Does not inadvertently admit any N i (keep them instruction negatives). Useful levers: domain narrowing, region, timeframe/recency, audi-ence level, style/format (e.g., “equations only”, “bulleted checklist”), methodology/evidence type, required artifacts (e.g., runnable code 

in a specific language), explicit exclusions (e.g., “exclude major capitals”, “exclude beach/island topics”). 3) Diversity requirement 

Ensure the new instruction’s format and perspective differ from the original_instruction (e.g., switch voice, deliverable type, constraint style). Avoid trivial rewording. 4) Sanity checks 

• Would P + be filtered out by the new constraints? If not, tighten them. • Is N ⋆ clearly included by the positive selectors? If not, pivot constraints toward N ⋆’s attributes. • Do all N i still get excluded? If any slip in, add explicit exclusions or tighten scope. 5) Conciseness 

The new instruction must be one or two sentences , imperative, concrete, and unambiguous. 

Guardrails 

• Do not reference passage IDs or this meta-task; exclude or include by attribute only. • Do not modify the query or passages. 

Checklist (before you output) • P+ becomes an instruction negative. • N⋆ becomes positive. • All N i remain instruction negatives. • Instruction is concise (≤2 sentences) and diverse vs. the 

original_instruction .• No meta-task language or passage IDs appear in the instruction. 

Now perform the task with the following data: 

• Query: {{ query }} 

• Original instruction: {{ original_instruction }} 

• Original positive passage: {{ original_positive }} 

• Specific instruction negative passage: {{ specific_instruction_negative }} 

• All remaining instruction negative passages: 

{% for negative in remaining_negatives %} 

Negative passage {{ loop.index }} : {{ negative }} {% endfor %} 

6