Title: Co-FactChecker: A Framework for Human-AI Collaborative Claim Verification Using Large Reasoning Models

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.13706v1

Published Time: Thu, 16 Apr 2026 00:54:54 GMT

Number of Pages: 20

Markdown Content:
## CO-F ACT CHECKER : A Framework for Human-AI Collaborative Claim Verification Using Large Reasoning Models 

Dhruv Sahnan 1,˚ Subhabrata Dutta 2,˚ Tanmoy Chakraborty 3

Preslav Nakov 1 Iryna Gurevych 21 MBZUAI, UAE 2 TU Darmstadt, Germany 3 IIT Delhi, India * Equal Contribution 

Abstract 

Professional fact-checkers rely on domain knowledge and deep contextual understand-ing to verify claims. Large language mod-els (LLMs) and large reasoning models (LRMs) lack such grounding and primarily reason from available evidence alone, creat-ing a mismatch between expert-led and fully automated claim verification. To mitigate this gap, we posit human–AI collaboration as a more promising path forward, where expert feedback, grounded in real-world knowledge and domain expertise, guides the model’s reasoning. However, existing LRMs are hard to calibrate to natural language feed-back, particularly in a multi-turn interaction setup. We propose CO-F ACT CHECKER ,a framework for human–AI collaborative claim verification. We introduce a new in-teraction paradigm that treats the model’s thinking trace as a shared scratchpad. C O-FACT CHECKER translates expert feedback into trace-edits that introduce targeted modi-fications to the trace, sidestepping the short-comings of dialogue-based interaction. We provide theoretical results showing that trace-editing offers advantages over multi-turn dia-logue, and our automatic evaluations demon-strate that C O-F ACT CHECKER outperforms existing autonomous and human–AI collab-oration approaches. Human evaluations fur-ther show that C O-F ACT CHECKER is pre-ferred over multi-turn dialogue, producing higher quality reasoning and verdicts along with relatively easier to interpret and more useful thinking traces. 1

1 Introduction 

Large language models (LLMs) and large reason-ing models (LRMs) have fueled interest in automat-ing time-intensive tasks to reduce expert workload. 

> 1Code released on GitHub.

However, these models fall short on complex tasks where accurate decision-making requires deep con-textual understanding and domain knowledge, such as fact-checking. 

Fact-checking requires expert knowledge. Ac-curate verification of real-world claims is a fun-damentally complex expert task, in part because many misinformation claims are neither true nor false; rather, they blend elements of both (Nakov et al., 2021; Warren et al., 2025). Debunking such a claim using a clear veracity label is hard, es-pecially when the label space is fine-grained and some labels are closely related, which is common in the label sets used by many fact-checking or-ganizations (e.g., Snopes uses labels like mostly true, mixture and mostly false; while USA Today uses labels like partly false, false implication, and missing context) (Juneja and Mitra, 2022; Snopes, 2025; USA Today, 2025). Disambiguating between such close labels requires contextual knowledge, much of which is embedded in the broader narra-tive surrounding the claim and is not always ap-parent from the evidence alone. Moreover, a crit-ical part of claim verification is to lay out clear, logical, and evidence-based reasoning steps to ex-plain the claim (Graves, 2017; Das et al., 2023), as well as to decide which evidence and the corre-sponding reasoning steps matter the most, why they matter, and how they should be weighed relative to each other. This reasoning must clearly place the claim into proper context against the broader narrative and fully convince any reader of the ver-dict (Lewandowsky et al., 2020). 

A case for Human–AI collaboration. Fact-checkers draw on ethical judgment, intuition, and human values — often shaped by experience and cultural, social, and domain knowledge — to iden-tify and reason from relevant evidence to verify a claim (Micallef et al., 2022; Warren et al., 2025). 

> arXiv:2604.13706v1 [cs.CL] 15 Apr 2026

Okay, so I need to fact-check the claim that Vice President Harris and her running mate Tim Walz announced a gun ban at a rally. First, the NRA’s X post says Harris and Walz want to ban commonly owned firearms, but that might be the NRA’s interpretation or beliefs, not direct proof. Next, August 2024 YouTube videos show both at a Pennsylvania rally ... said that they would pursue background checks, red flag laws, and an assault weapons ban ... endorse common-sense gun violence laws while affirming the Second Amendment. NRA website articles from July 2024 argue that Harris threatens the Second Amendment citing her 2019 support for mandatory buybacks, but those articles predate the August rally. Putting this together: the August 2024 rally speeches show that Harris and Walz explicitly backed universal background checks, red flag laws, and an assault weapons ban if elected. While they did not say 'gun ban,' those policies would impose major restrictions on certain firearms. Their own remarks therefore support the claim. The NRA's claims also don't contra--dict their statements. 

Thinking Trace 

True Veracity Explanation 

The claim is supported by evidence from Kamala Harris and Tim Walz's speeches at a August 2024 rally. In their statements, they explicitly mentioned plans to pass an assault weapons ban if elected. This aligns with the claim that they announced a gun ban during the rally. 

Okay, so I need to revise my previous analysis based on the user's feedback. First, the user pointed out that calling an assault weapons ban a “gun ban” is overstated. That phrase suggests banning all guns, which Harris and Walz did not propose. They refer--red only to assault weapons, and the user believes that the primary elements of the claim are false due to this nuance. Second, the user wants the NRA’s X posts treated cautiously. Because the NRA is a gun-rights advocacy group, its claims may reflect bias and framing rather than a neutral account. Alright, my original conclusion of “true” needs adjustment. In the August 2024 YouTube videos, Harris and Walz supported an assault weapons ban, along with universal background checks and red flag laws. They did not call for banning all guns, so describing this as a “gun ban” is mis--leading without clarification. I should also mention that the NRA's post may also exaggerate the claim to influence its audience, so it should not be treated as neutral evidence. So, considering these points, the primary claim of announc--ing a "gun ban" is misleading because it doesn't specify that they're targeting assault weapons specifically, which is not a complete gun ban. However, they did announce plans for significant restrictions on certain firearms, which effectively amounts to a ban, making the primary element of the claim true. But the claim as stated overstates the scope of the announcement. 

Thinking Trace 

Mostly True Veracity Explanation 

Kamala Harris and Tim Walz did announce specific firearm restrictions, including an assault weapons ban, during their August 2024 rally. However, the claim that they announced a complete "gun ban" is an overstatement since they speci--fically targeted assault weapons rather than all firearms. The NRA's statements should be viewed with consideration of their advocacy for gun rights. 

Claim: Okay, so I need to fact-check the claim that Vice President Harris and her running mate Tim Walz announced a gun ban at a rally. First, the NRA's X post ... interpretation or beliefs, not direct proof. This also comes from a known advocate of gun rights, which may impact their credibility as evidence for or against the claim. Next, August 2024 YouTube videos show ... while affirming the Second Amendment. However, they do not say anything about a complete gun ban. NRA website articles ... predate the August rally. Again, NRA is also a known advocate of gun rights, which impacts their credibility. Putting this together: the August 2024 ... therefore support the claim. The NRA's claims also don't contradict their statements. Wait, I should distinguish between an assault weapon ban and a general gun ban, and also consider the NRA's bias on gun rights while evaluating the claim. So, putting it together: Harris specifically mentions an 'assault weapons ban', which is a subset of guns. The YouTube videos do not mention a general or complete gun ban but rather focus on specific laws like universal background checks and red flag laws. NRA claims that a general gun ban was announced but this is likely an overstatement. The evidence doesn't support the claim of a general gun ban, only a ban on assault weapons if elected. Therefore, the primary element of the claim that they announced a gun ban is partially true because they did talk about banning assault weapons. However, they didn't announce a complete or general gun ban. So it's mostly false in terms of the scope. 

Thinking Trace 

Mostly False Veracity Explanation 

The evidence shows that Vice President Harris and Tim Walz disc--ussed supporting specific gun control measures such as universal background checks, red flag laws, and an assault weapons ban during the rally. However, they did not announce a general 'gun ban' but rather focused on banning assault weapons. The claim's primary element of announcing a complete gun ban is false; it misrepresents their stated policies. 

Autonomous Large Reasoning Model Multi-Turn Dialogue Interaction Co-FactChecker Figure 1: Sample run of the claim-verification task for a given claim. We show the response of the autonomous LRM, for which the expert provides some feedback. We show the response of the feedback integration in two interaction setups: multi-turn dialogue interaction and C O-F ACT CHECKER . We see that the autonomous model makes some errors in the reasoning; the model is unable to integrate all feedback points into the reasoning in multi-turn dialogue; and C O-F ACT CHECKER resolves these failure modes through its trace-editing mechanism. 

Autonomous LLM-based systems lack such background knowledge and typically rely only on the available evidence and their parametric knowl-edge. For instance, as illustrated in Figure 1, the autonomous LRM constructs arguments using ev-idence from an inauthentic source and uses these arguments to draw conclusions while verifying a given claim. It also overgeneralizes the core finding and incorrectly concludes that the claim is true. In contrast, professional fact-checkers did not use the inauthentic source as evidence, rather as an exam-ple of where the claim was found to be spreading; and correctly contextualized the claim by distin-guishing between “an assault weapons ban” and “a complete gun ban”. Moreover, fact-checkers have also repeatedly expressed their skepticism towards tools that aim to fully automate claim ver-ification, arguing that human expertise cannot be replaced (Arnold, 2020; Nakov et al., 2021; Warren et al., 2025). Instead, fact-checkers have advocated for hy-brid, human-in-the-loop approaches as the way for-ward (Das et al., 2023). A natural paradigm for human–AI collaboration in this context would be as follows: an LLM/LRM proposes a verdict com-prising a veracity label and a short fact-checking explanation along with an explicit decision-making process; a human fact-checker interacts with the model by validating the model’s reasoning and the verdict; and provides feedback, embedded with contextual knowledge, which is used as guidance to iteratively co-construct a more accurate verdict. 

Challenges of effective collaboration. How-ever, designing a framework that enables effec-tive human–AI collaboration is non-trivial. Even though multi-turn dialogue emerges as a natural interaction protocol, recent studies reveal issues that may undermine human–AI collaboration for verifying claims. First, existing automatic fact-checking systems often “black-box” their decision-making process, making it difficult for users to understand the ratio-nale behind the proposed verdicts (Micallef et al., 2022; Das et al., 2023). Explicit reasoning in LRMs mitigates this issue to an extent, but gaining con-trol over the reasoning trajectories of these models remains difficult through prompting alone (Kwon et al., 2025). LRMs frequently struggle to incor-porate user input, especially when interacting in multi-turn dialogue: ignoring parts of the input, failing to retain global instructions or such given in preceding interactions, and errors propagating due to a previously proposed problematic response (Li et al., 2025b; Kwan et al., 2024). In expert do-mains, these limitations only become more pro-nounced ( ¸ Sahinuç et al., 2025). Consistent with these findings from existing work, for the claim verification task, we observed that the LRM often failed to integrate expert feedback into the reason-ing and failed to retain global instructions about the claim verification task in a multi-turn dialogue (c.f. Figure 1 and §A). Moreover, this setup also pro-duced reasoning that was fragmented across several turns, which forced users to stitch together multiple thinking traces to reconstruct the full reasoning (c.f. §6). 

Proposed solution. To address these challenges, we introduce CO-F ACT CHECKER , a framework for human-AI collaborative claim verification. Our framework uses an LRM that first proposes a can-didate verdict while exposing its decision-making process through a thinking trace . This trace serves as a common scratchpad between the fact-checker and the LRM to co-construct the reasoning. Here, the fact-checker validates the reasoning steps in the trace and instructs the framework to add, to remove, or to modify them using natural language feedback. To support this interaction, our framework introduces an editor module that is designed to interpret the fact-checker’s feedback and to apply optimal edits to the thinking trace, and subsequently to derive the verdict for the claim. Our main contributions are four-fold: 

➥ We propose CO-F ACT CHECKER , a frame-work for claim verification, which introduces a new interaction paradigm that enables a fact-checker and an LRM to reason and to co-construct evidence-based reasoning steps within a shared thinking trace, and subse-quently to derive a verdict for the input claim. 

➥ We provide theoretical proofs showing that trace-editing can dominate multi-turn dia-logue under equal capacity constraints and realistic assumptions aligned with real LRMs. 

➥ Through comprehensive automatic evaluation, we show that C O-F ACT CHECKER outper-forms existing interaction approaches that fa-cilitate human–AI collaboration as well as au-tonomous LLM-based systems. 

➥ Finally, through human evaluations, we show that C O-F ACT CHECKER is preferred over multi-turn dialogue, offering better control to users for guiding the model, better reason-ing and verdicts, and thinking traces that are relatively easier to perceive and more useful. We also discuss key issues as experienced by users to facilitate future research. 

2 Related Work 

Automatic fact-checking. Prior work has largely pursued fully automating fact-checking by splitting the problem into several subtasks (Vlachos and Riedel, 2014; Guo et al., 2022; Sahnan et al., 2025). However, human-centered analyses found that fact-checking experts see limited utility in autonomous tools (Juneja and Mitra, 2022; Das et al., 2023), and remain skeptical, especially of automatic claim verification , where human intuition, creativity and expert judgment are critical, yet not reliably cap-tured by current models (Nakov et al., 2021). Many claims are not binary; rather they mix true and false elements, omit crucial context, or are true only un-der specific framings (Nakov et al., 2021; Warren et al., 2025). Accordingly, fact-checking organizations use fine-grained veracity labels paired with short expla-nations (Snopes, 2025; USA Today, 2025). Fact-checkers rely on domain knowledge and expertise to place such claims into proper context. More-over, fact-checkers do not just cite evidence; they construct evidence-based reasoning to explain the claim and weigh the importance and the reliability of each piece of evidence against the broader real-world context to derive a verdict (Graves, 2017; Warren et al., 2025). In contrast, LLMs/LRMs may lean on surface-level associations and sta-tistical priors (Loru et al., 2025), and existing claim verification systems often “black-box” their decision-making process in their responses (Das et al., 2023). These observations motivate two design choices: to better align with real-world practices, we ( i) treat organization-specific veracity labels as part of the input, and ( ii ) expose the model’s decision-making process via thinking traces to support expert over-sight. 

Human-AI collaboration. Instead of optimizing for full automation, recent work argues for human– AI collaboration on complex, expert-domain tasks, where humans and models co-construct solutions that align with expert knowledge and preferences (Dutta et al., 2025; Lou et al., 2025; Zou et al., 2025). Prior studies operationalize collaboration via natural language interaction, e.g., multi-turn dialogue for problem-solving (Lin et al., 2024; Shao et al., 2025), preference-based search over the solution space (Dutta et al., 2025), and multi-turn rewards to train models to collaborate (Wu et al., 2025). Claim verification is one such expert-domain task, and fact-checking experts have advo-cated for human-in-the-loop approaches (Das et al., 2023). Motivated by these insights, we propose C O-FACT CHECKER , enabling experts to collaborate with an LRM using natural language feedback, and to co-construct evidence-based reasoning steps to derive the verdict for a given claim. Our approach builds on the preference-based search paradigm of Dutta et al. (2025), in which we map expert feedback to targeted edits on the model’s decision-making process to derive a more accurate verdict. 

Intervening in the thinking trace. Towards mit-igating the lack of instruction-following and con-trollability in LRMs (Li et al., 2025b; Kwan et al., 2024; Laban et al., 2025; Kwon et al., 2025), recent efforts intervene on intermediate thoughts to steer model behavior. For example, Li et al. (2025a) add task-specific think-prefixes, and Zhang et al. (2025) insert targeted thoughts at selected positions within a trace. Our approach goes beyond such insertions by allowing explicit modification and removal of existing reasoning steps, enabling finer-grained correction of erroneous reasoning and more direct control over reasoning trajectories. More im-portantly, prior work has not explored trace-editing as an interaction paradigm between humans and models. In our framework, we treat the thinking trace as a shared scratchpad: expert feedback is translated into direct edits, and the revised trace is used to continue generation and to derive a more accurate verdict. 

3 Method 

3.1 Task Overview 

Given a claim c and a user-specified veracity la-bel set Vc, produce ( i) a verdict for c, compris-ing a veracity label vc P Vc and a short fact-checking explanation ec; and ( ii ) a thinking trace 

tc that documents the model’s decision-making process. We denote a candidate solution Sc as: 

Sc “ x vc, e c, t cy,

and we represent the thinking trace tc as an ordered list of evidence-based reasoning steps ri:

tc “ p r1, r 2, . . . , r mq.

We further study a human–AI collaborative setup for this task, in which expert knowledge k is in-jected into the model. This knowledge may be in-jected implicitly (e.g., the expert selects one among 

N solutions) or explicitly (e.g., the expert reviews a solution and gives natural language feedback to guide the model towards an improved solution). 

3.2 CO-F ACT CHECKER 

We propose C O-F ACT CHECKER , a framework for human–AI collaborative claim verification. We design our framework around the key idea of treat-ing an LRM’s thinking trace as a shared scratch-pad : the model proposes a verdict while expos-ing its reasoning steps, the expert reviews them, and the framework converts the expert feedback into direct trace-edits that steer the reasoning. C O-FACT CHECKER comprises two main components: 

➥ The Verification Modules propose a candidate solution for the claim verification task and integrate expert feedback to improve the solution. This component comprises three modules: (i) Retriever R, the evidence retriever, which generates search queries and retrieves relevant evi-dence from a search database. (ii ) Verifier 2 V, the base LRM, which reasons over retrieved evidence to draft a candidate solution for the claim verification task. (iii ) Editor E, which maps expert feedback into trace-edits that remove or modify reasoning steps, or guide the LRM along a specific reasoning path. We pair this module with a custom reward model (cf. §B), which allows us to sample better actions for performing trace-edits. 

> 2Not to be confused with verifier modules in test-time scaling literature (Lightman et al., 2024; Lifshitz et al., 2025). pass to Expert for review

Input Claim: c Veracity Label Space: V c

Expert 

Retriever Search Queries 

Qc

(a) Evidence Documents 

D c

Verifier 

Explanation (e c)Veracity (vc)Thinking Trace ( tc)Candidate Solution (S c):(b) 

Expert 

Improved Candidate Solution ( S c *)

> Okay, I need to verify the claim: ... According to the YouTube video transcript of the speech, he said... But CNN reports that he has said before that he does not support ... ... So, the claim seems mostly false true, because even though he has clarified before ... Wait, I should focus on his exact words, the events of the rally, and how this claim could harm ...

Editor Verifier Feedback (FSc )Trace-Editing       

> continue generation pass to Expert for review
> The Expert
> approves
> Sc/Sc *as-is (i) remove reasoning step (ii) modify reasoning step (iii) append guidance tokens ( g')

Figure 2: Workflow of C O-F ACT CHECKER . We split the collaboration process into two stages: (a) proposing a candidate solution : the Retriever retrieves evidence and the Verifier produces a verdict for the claim, and a thinking trace; (b) co-constructing an improved solution : the Expert reviews the solution, the Editor converts expert feedback into trace-edits, and the Verifier continues the generation from the edited trace to yield a refined verdict and trace. 

➥ The Expert reviews a candidate solution and provides natural language feedback, grounded in expert knowledge, to highlight and to improve prob-lematic reasoning steps in V’s thinking trace. As illustrated in Figure 2, we split the collabora-tive verification process into two stages as follows: 

(a) Proposing a candidate solution 

Given claim c, the retriever R generates a set of search queries Qc to extract more context about the claim and its surrounding narrative. For each query 

q P Qc, it retrieves the top-k documents from the search database, yielding a set of relevant evidence documents Dc. Now, the verifier V uses Dc and 

Vc to verify the claim c, producing a verdict com-prising a veracity label vc P Vc and a fact-checking explanation ec, along with a thinking trace tc.Together, they form the candidate solution Sc:

Sc “ Vpc, E c, V cq“ x vc, e c, t cy

(b) Co-constructing an improved solution The Expert gives feedback. Here, the expert re-views the proposed solution Sc, primarily verifying whether the reasoning steps in tc constructed using the Dc are correct; and whether vc and ec correctly place the claim c into context. Based on their review, the expert either accepts 

Sc as-is, or returns a set of natural language feed-back instructions FSc , grounded in expert knowl-edge k:

FSc “ ExpertReview pSc, k q“

#

H ; Sc accepted 

tf1, f 2, . . . , f nu ; otherwise ,

where each fi represents a feedback instruction, which identifies an issue in the candidate solution 

Sc (e.g., an incorrect reasoning step, speculative framing, or missing real-world context). Moreover, to enable automatic evaluations at scale, we design an LLM-based oracle O to act as a proxy for the human expert. As discussed, experts rely on important context from real-world experience and domain knowledge (which shape their expert knowledge k) for the claim verification task. LLMs, however, lack such context, which lim-its their ability to validate candidate solutions just based on their internal parametric knowledge. We therefore allow O to refer to the ground-truth fact-check and to fine-grained grading rubrics (cf. §C), which together form synthetic expert knowledge 

ksyn .Now, the oracle produces an evaluation report 

Report Sc for Sc using ksyn and then converts it into feedback instructions F O 

> Sc

:

Report Sc “ OpSc, k syn q,F O 

> Sc

“ OpSc, Report Sc q,

where F O 

> Sc

follows the same format as the expert feedback and can drive trace-edits at scale. 

Trace-editing. Here, the editor E translates the expert feedback FSc into targeted trace-edits over the original trace tc “ p r1, . . . , r mq. In particular, 

E first assigns each instruction fi P FSc to one of three trace-edit types: ( a) remove a reasoning step 

ri from tc, ( b) modify a reasoning step ri P tc to a correction r1

> i

, and ( c) guide global reasoning by appending guidance tokens g1 to tc. E then iterates over each ri P tc and applies all remove and modify trace-edits, yielding the edited trace t1

> c

. Finally, it compresses all guide-type instructions into a single, compact sequence of guidance tokens g1 using a predefined template, so that guidance is injected in a consistent, model-readable form. 

Continuing the generation for a new solution. 

Now, V continues the generation using the edited trace t1

> c

, appended with guidance tokens g1 that nudge V’s reasoning trajectory along a specific path, as a prefix (suppressing the previously gener-ated verdict and the end-of-thinking token), produc-ing an improved candidate solution S˚ 

> c

. Formally, 

V extends the prefix to a new trace t˚ 

> c

and produces an updated verdict comprising a new veracity label 

v˚ 

> c

P Vc and a new explanation e˚ 

> c

, as follows: 

S˚ 

> c

“ x v˚ 

> c

, e ˚ 

> c

, t ˚ 

> c

y.

Since the generation continues from the edited pre-fix, the updated trace has the form 

t˚ 

> c

“ t1 

> c

` g1 ` p r˚ 

> 1

, r ˚ 

> 2

, . . . , r ˚ 

> m1

q,

where pr˚ 

> 1

, . . . , r ˚ 

> m1

q are new reasoning steps pro-duced after integrating the expert feedback. We continue the solution Ñ feedback Ñ trace-edits Ñ solution loop until the expert is satisfied with the solution. For automatic evaluations, we fix the maximum number of loop iterations to 3. We use DeepSeek-R1-Distill-Qwen-32B as the base model for V, Llama-3.2-3B-Instruct, a relatively small LLM, for E, and GPT-4o-mini for R and O.

4 Theoretical Results 

Here, we provide theoretical guarantees for why our trace-editing approach is provably better to in-tegrate natural language feedback into a solution compared to a dialogue setup. We start with show-ing that, under reasonable assumptions, editing the thinking trace is equipped with greater information capacity than natural language feedback provided in a dialogue setup. Let Σ be a finite vocabulary of tokens. A rea-soning model generates a thinking trace t P Σ˚

followed by a decision y. The human expert ob-serves a discrete random correction variable C with support C. We consider the following two channels of oracle interventions: 

➥ Trace-edit. There exists a finite set of traces 

τ ptq Ă Σ˚ reachable from the current trace t via a finite set of edits, with |τ ptq| “ Medit . The ora-cle chooses t1 P τ ptq based on some deterministic mapping U : C Ñ τ ptq.

➥ Dialogue. The oracle emits textual feedback (possibly multi-turn) Făy,t ą. The model maps this message to a new trace tFăy,t ą via an arbitrary function of pt, F ăy,t ąq.Let Lptq “ E rlpy, y ˚q| ts denote the Bayes risk induced by trace t, where lp¨q denotes a loss func-tion over decision y inferred from trace t given the ground truth decision y˚. We denote the expected risks induced by the trace-edit and the dialogue channel as Lτ and LFăy,t ą , respectively. IpX; Y q

denotes mutual information between random vari-ables X and Y . Additionally, we assume that: 

Assumption 1. The model has an information bot-tleneck; while mapping any natural language feed-back Făy,t ą to trace t1, the model maps Făy,t ą to an internal representation variable Z with bounded total information HpZq ď R.

Assumption 2. For two given channels mapping 

C to traces t1 and t2, if IpC; t1q ă IpC; t2q, then the minimal achievable Bayes risk satisfies 

inf E rLpt1qs ą inf E rLpt2qs 

Theorem 1. If log Medit ą R and HpCq ą R,then trace-editing allows lower minimal Bayes risk. 

Proof sketch: The dialogue channel establishes a Markov chain as follows: 

C Ñ Făy,t ą Ñ Z Ñ tFăy,t ąFollowing the Data Processing Inequal-ity, IpC; tFăy,t ą q ď IpC; Zq and trivially, 

IpC; Zq ď HpZq ď R.In contrast, the trace-edit channel admits a de-terministic mapping from C onto one among Medit 

many traces. Therefore, 

IpC; τ ptqq ě min pHpCq, log Medit q

Thus, IpC; tFăy,t ą q ą IpC; tτ q, and following Assumption 2, 

inf E “LFăy,t ą

‰ ą inf E rLτ s ■

One can readily extend the argumentation to find the asymptotic information capacity of the trace-editing operator: 

Corollary 1.1. If the length of the trace is n and one allows for up to k token edits, then 

log Medit ě k plog |Σ| ` log pn{kqq 

With complex reasoning (increasing n), the dom-inance of the trace-edit channel over the dialogue channel increases as well. A crucial element is that conversational feedback is limited by the fixed information capacity of the internal representa-tions (Assumption 1). This is natural to mod-ern LLMs/LRMs as they are trained to generalize across paraphrasing. In expert-domain reasoning like fact-checking, where only the argumentative relationship between different facts is relevant, a 

good reasoning model is one with low entropy Z,and is robust against irrelevant perturbations. This further strengthens our argument that the trace-editing channel dominates in capacity over the di-alogue channel, and therefore, is more expressive. However, greater expressiveness is not a sufficient condition for finding the optimum using known optimization strategies. Next, we show that trace-editing dominates di-alogue setup from an optimization perspective as well. The optimization objective under a trace-editing operation can be stated as: 

min   

> t1Pτprq

L `t1˘

For the conversational operation, the optimization becomes bi-level. The model interprets feedback via an internal policy Φ:

tFăy,t ą P arg min  

> t1

Φpt1; t, F ăy,t ąq

Then, the following minimization is attempted: 

min  

> Făy,t ąPΣ˚

E “L `tFăy,t ą

˘‰ 

We define the reachable trace sets via each oper-ation as 

Sτ :“ τ ptq SF :“ t tFăy,t ą |Făy,t ą P Σ˚u

Lemma 2. The interpretation map is many-to-one, i.e., there exist Făy,t ą, F 1ăy,t ą P Σ˚ such that tFăy,t ą “ tF 1ăy,t ą but Făy,t ą ‰ F 1ăy,t ą.

Proof sketch: Following Assumption 1, we pro-ceed with proof via contradiction. If the mapping from Făy,t ą to tFăy,t ą is injective, then it can be decomposed into two successive injective maps from Făy,t ą to Z and then Z to Făy,t ą. However, that would allow complete information retention from Făy,t ą to Z. This violates Assumption 1 as 

HpZq is upper-bounded by R. Hence, the mapping from Făy,t ą to Z, and by extension, from Făy,t ą

to tFăy,t ą , is many-to-one. ■

Theorem 3. Optimizing for a trace-editing objec-tive yields strictly better local optimum compared to optimizing for a feedback operation: 

inf 

> t1PSτ

Lpt1q ă inf 

> t1PSFăy,t ą

Lpt1q

Proof sketch: Since the mapping from Făy,t ą to 

t is many-to-one, SF Ĺ Sτ , the loose inequality follows trivially: 

inf 

> t1PSτ

Lpt1q ď inf 

> t1PSFăy,t ą

Lpt1q

Following Theorem 1, there must exist a trace 

t1 P Sτ zSFăy,t ą for which the Bayes risk is lower than the minimum risk trace in SFăy,t ą . Hence, the strict inequality holds. ■

Theorems 1 and 3 together establish the supe-riority of the trace-editing intervention over the conversational feedback regime. Our results can be explained as follows: trace-editing is at least as good as conversational feedback to elicit rea-soning improvements; under the realistic scenario of information bottleneck, where the model loses information to interpret feedback via compression, and complex reasoning with rich trace information, the former (trace-editing) becomes strictly better. 5 Experimental Setup 

5.1 Datasets ExClaim (Zeng and Gao, 2024) contains 987 claims from four public fact-checking websites, each with a veracity label, explanation, supporting webpages, and the full fact-checking article. As each website uses its own veracity label set, we use the corresponding website-specific labels to define the input veracity label space Vc.

AmbiguousSnopes is a dataset we curated, which comprises 172 claims from Snopes , with the same accompanying annotations. It focuses on claims that are neither fully true nor fully false, highlighting the limitations of autonomous fact-checking and motivating expert feedback in a human–AI collaboration setting. We adopt the Snopes veracity label set to construct Vc.

5.2 Baselines Autonomous. We used the following LLM-based fact-checking systems: FIRE (Xie et al., 2025), FactCheck-GPT (Wang et al., 2024), and SAFE (Wei et al., 2024), as autonomous baselines. We also benchmarked the performance of an open 

deep research agent 3, which we adapted for our claim verification task. 

Human-AI collaboration. We used the Verifier 

in two human-AI collaborative settings in addition to C O-F ACT CHECKER : ( i) choose one , in which the verifier V generates N candidate solutions and the oracle O selects the one that best aligns with their preferences, and ( ii ) multi-turn dialogue , in which O and V interact in a multi-turn dialogue to iteratively improve the reasoning and the verdict. 

6 Automatic Evaluation 

Following our setup, we design the following eval-uations: ( i) veracity prediction, measuring the sys-tem’s ability to select the correct label from a user-specified label set, ( ii ) explanation generation, eval-uating how well the system explains the assigned veracity label and puts the claim in context through a short text, and ( iii ) the decision-making process documented as the thinking trace, evaluating the correctness of the reasoning steps made by the sys-tem to solve the verification task. 

> 3We implemented HuggingFace’s Open-Source Deep Re-search using OpenAI’s o4-mini.

6.1 Evaluation Measures 

We used several automatic evaluation measures to compare C O-F ACT CHECKER against the base-lines. Specifically, we used precision, recall and F1 to evaluate the predicted veracity, and ROUGE-L (Lin, 2004) and BERTScore (Zhang et al., 2020) to measure the lexical and the semantic similar-ity between the generated fact-checking explana-tion and the ground truth reference. To evaluate the decision-making process, we used the full fact-checking article as the proxy for the ground truth expert reasoning, and compared the thinking trace against it. We used Entailment Score (Zeng and Gao, 2024; Sahnan et al., 2025) to measure the con-sistency and the coverage of the thinking trace with respect to the corresponding fact-checking article. We also performed LLM-as-a-judge (Zheng et al., 2023) evaluations on a random subsample of 200 examples from ExClaim , assessing the gener-ated explanations and the thinking traces on two criteria: Correctness and Comprehensibility . For this, we designed five-point rubrics to score the generated texts on each criterion (cf. §E). We se-lected Prometheus-2 (Kim et al., 2024), an LLM fine-tuned for evaluations on custom criteria, as the judge and used the expert-written explanations and fact-checking articles as the reference texts. 

6.2 Results and Discussion Comparative analysis. Table 1 shows the per-formance of various systems on ExClaim and Am-biguousSnopes along the three evaluation axes. We see that oracle-simulated human–AI collaboration approaches outperform autonomous systems across both datasets, supporting our core premise that ex-pert feedback is valuable for guiding the model’s reasoning. CO-F ACT CHECKER emerges as the strongest: compared to the best autonomous base-line, it considerably improves the entailment of thinking traces with expert-written fact-checking articles (by 6 points on ExClaim and by 3 points on AmbiguousSnopes ), indicating that feedback-integration via trace-edits can produce better align-ment in reasoning between the model and the ex-pert. Consequently, the quality of the verdicts pro-duced by C O-F ACT CHECKER also improves: com-pared to the best autonomous baseline, precision on veracity prediction improves by 4 points on each dataset, while F1 score improves by 3 points on 

ExClaim and by 2 points on AmbiguousSnopes ; and explanation quality shows subtle improvements. System ExClaim AmbiguousSnopes Veracity Label Explanation Trace Veracity Label Explanation Trace                                                                                                                                                                                                        

> PÒRÒF1ÒRLÒBS ÒES ÒPÒRÒF1ÒRLÒBS ÒES Ò
> Autonomous
> FactCheckGPT 0.21 0.16 0.16 0.19 0.85 0.27 0.25 0.18 0.15 0.18 0.87 0.26 FIRE 0.24 0.16 0.16 0.18 0.86 0.28 0.31 0.26 0.18 0.18 0.86 0.26 SAFE 0.26 0.16 0.17 0.19 0.86 0.28 0.31 0.27 0.18 0.19 0.86 0.26
> Verifier 0.29 0.24 0.25 0.20 0.86 0.28 0.35 0.26 0.21 0.18 0.86 0.27 –best-of-N0.30 0.25 0.25 0.20 0.86 0.27 0.35 0.27 0.21 0.18 0.86 0.28 –self-refine 0.29 0.24 0.24 0.19 0.85 0.24 0.35 0.24 0.21 0.17 0.85 0.23 –MCTS 0.31 0.25 0.25 0.20 0.86 0.30 0.35 0.25 0.23 0.19 0.86 0.29 Deep Research 0.22 0.31 0.24 0.16 0.83 NA 0.26 0.29 0.19 0.14 0.83 NA
> Simulated Human-AI Collaboration (Using an Oracle)
> Choose One 0.29 0.25 0.25 0.19 0.86 0.28 0.35 0.26 0.21 0.19 0.86 0.27 Multi-Turn Dialogue 0.31 0.26 0.25 0.20 0.86 0.23 0.37 0.24 0.23 0.16 0.84 0.24
> CO-F ACT CHECKER 0.34 0.27 0.28 0.21 0.87 0.36 0.39 0.27 0.25 0.19 0.87 0.32
> –w/o reward model 0.31 0.26 0.27 0.20 0.86 0.32 0.37 0.25 0.23 0.17 0.87 0.30 –w/o remove / modify 0.30 0.26 0.26 0.20 0.86 0.28 0.37 0.24 0.23 0.18 0.86 0.28 –w/o guidance tokens 0.31 0.25 0.26 0.19 0.83 0.30 0.33 0.24 0.23 0.17 0.86 0.31

Table 1: Automatic evaluation simulated using the oracle module. We report the results across three axes: veracity label (precision, recall, and F1), explanation (ROUGE-L and BERTScore), and thinking trace (EntailmentScore). Ò

indicates that a higher score is better. NA denotes that the measure is not applicable for Deep Research. A bold 

score represents the best performance for that evaluation measure, while an underlined bold is a tie for best results. 

Autonomous baselines lag considerably across the three evaluation axes, highlighting the diffi-culty of producing accurate verdicts without ex-pert oversight. The base Verifier emerges as the strongest autonomous model. The deep re-search agent achieves the highest recall on ve-racity prediction, but produces lower quality ex-planations and does not expose a thinking trace, which limits its suitability in our task setup. Among other human–AI collaboration approaches, 

multi-turn dialogue yields modest gains on ve-racity prediction task. Explanation quality, how-ever, degrades substantially on AmbiguousSnopes .It also exhibits a sharp decline in thinking trace quality. This is because multi-turn dialogue does not maintain a single, coherent trace like C O-FACT CHECKER ; instead, it produces a new trace as a follow up of preceding interactions at each feed-back turn. This forces us to stitch together traces from each dialogue turn, which preserves redun-dant and previously flagged problematic reasoning steps, ultimately lowering the scores. 

LLM-as-a-judge evaluation. Table 2 shows the results for LLM-as-a-judge evaluation of the expla-nations and the thinking traces on a subsample of 

ExClaim . We see that C O-F ACT CHECKER ranks best on 3 of the 4 dimensions: it achieves the high-est correctness for explanations and thinking traces, is tied for most comprehensible thinking traces, and ranks second for explanation comprehensibility .                                 

> System Explanation Trace Corr Comp Corr Comp
> FactCheckGPT 4.21 4.33 4.03 3.40 FIRE 4.24 4.15 3.92 3.44 SAFE 4.45 4.11 3.99 3.52
> Verifier 4.52 4.23 3.83 3.47 Deep Research 4.45 4.19 NA NA
> Multi-Turn Dialogue 4.56 4.39 3.42 2.48
> CO-F ACT CHECKER 4.68 4.33 4.12 3.52

Table 2: LLM-as-a-judge evaluation. We evaluate the quality of the explanation and of the thinking trace on a five-point scale in terms of Correctness (Corr) and Comprehensibility (Comp). NA denotes that the measure is not applicable for Deep Research. 

Multi-turn dialogue remains strong on expla-nation quality, showing highest comprehensibil-ity , but its traces are rated considerably lower on both criteria. This pattern is consistent with our entailment-based trace evaluation and supports our design choice: co-constructing a shared trace through trace-editing yields a more interpretable decision record that is aligned with expert feedback, compared to aggregating reasoning across multiple traces from each interaction turn in a dialogue. 

6.3 Ablation Studies Test-time scaling. To push the limits of au-tonomous systems on our task, we further applied three test-time compute scaling strategies to V (see §D for details on the reward models used). Reasoning and Verdict Quality Instruction Following Usefulness of the Thinking Trace Perceived Effort for the Collaboration Win-rate 61% 10% 12% 17% 62% 14% 24% 17% 78% 8% 14% Co-FactChecker Tie Tie (but both are undesirable) Multi-Turn Dialogue 0% 0% 100% 100% 0% 0% 100% 100% 0% 100%    

> 53% 29% 18% 21% 21% 15% 43% 43% 36% 64% 29% 14% 14%
> 64% 36% Overall Preference

Figure 3: Human evaluations. We report win-rates and ties between C O-F ACT CHECKER and multi-turn dialogue across five evaluation criteria: Verdict Quality , Usefulness of the Thinking Trace , Instruction Following , Perceived Effort for the Collaboration , and Overall Preference .

Specifically, we used best-of-N (Stiennon et al., 2020), Monte Carlo tree search (MCTS) (Zhang et al., 2024), and self-refine (Madaan et al., 2023). We see in Table 1 that MCTS emerges as the best; it shows clear gains in trace quality, owing to its abil-ity to sample and to choose the best reasoning step at each stage in the thinking trace, which also leads to subtle gains in verdict quality. Best-of-N and 

self-refine offer similar subtle improvements, but trace quality degrades substantially for self-refine .In sum, the marginal gains elicited by these strate-gies remain well below those offered by human– AI collaboration, reinforcing that compute scaling alone is insufficient to close the gap on this task. 

Trace-edits. We also evaluated trace-editing via the following ablations: ( i) w/o reward model (re-moves the editor’s reward model and samples a single trace-edit per instruction), ( ii ) w/o remove/ modify (restricts trace-editing to only appending the guidance tokens), and ( iii ) w/o guidance to-kens (skips the guidance tokens and allows only removals/modifications as trace-edits). We see in Table 1 that all three variants hurt the perfor-mance. Removing the reward model causes a sharp drop, indicating that the utility estimation implicit to the editor LLM is limited and can lead to sub-optimal trace-edits; sampling-and-selection via an explicit reward model helps identify effective trace-edits. We observe similar degradation in the w/o remove/modify variant, suggesting that explicit re-moval or correction of problematic reasoning steps is valuable for shaping accurate decision-making. Finally, omitting the guidance tokens also degrades performance, highlighting the role of high-level guidance beyond local fixes: the guidance tokens steer continued generation towards a preferred rea-soning trajectory that is aligned with the feedback. 

7 Human Evaluations 

Evaluation with proxy oracles is insufficient to draw conclusions about the framework’s practical usefulness for users, as it does not capture how experts find the interaction, whether the thinking trace is genuinely helpful, or how much effort is re-quired to collaborate in practice. We therefore con-ducted human evaluations involving two experts from leading fact-checking organizations and three researchers specializing in NLP for fact-checking. We collected 14 claims fact-checked by different fact-checking organizations and presented a claim per evaluation to each participant. The participants then collaborated with the verifier for three rounds of feedback under two interaction protocols, i.e., trace-editing via C O-F ACT CHECKER and multi-turn dialogue. Following these interactions, we asked the participants to compare the protocols on four evaluation criteria: reasoning and verdict quality , usefulness of the thinking trace , instruction following , and perceived effort for the collabora-tion . We also asked the participants to rate the 

practical usefulness of human–AI collaboration to expedite professional fact-checking on a 5-point Likert scale, and their overall preference between CO-F ACT CHECKER and multi-turn dialogue (see §F for additional details). Figure 3 reports the win-rates and the ties be-tween C O-F ACT CHECKER and multi-turn dialogue for the overall preference and each fine-grained evaluation criterion. Overall, we can see that the participants preferred C O-F ACT CHECKER over multi-turn dialogue, with superior performance across all finer-grained aspects. Specifically, the participants reported lower collaboration effort and 

greater usefulness of the thinking trace for C O-FACT CHECKER .They indicated that the edited traces offer a co-herent overview of the reasoning steps used to solve the verification task and can serve as reusable ar-tifacts. We attribute these advantages to how the thinking traces are constructed in the two proto-cols. C O-F ACT CHECKER maintains a single, co-herent trace that is iteratively revised via trace-edits. In contrast, a multi-turn dialogue gener-ates a new trace (and a new verdict) after each feedback turn, which forces users to reconstruct the full decision-making process by stitching to-gether multiple traces, resulting in a lengthy text that complicates post-hoc interpretation of the trace and negatively affects usefulness. Consistent with prior work (Li et al., 2025b; Kwan et al., 2024), the participants perceived multi-turn dialogue as weaker at instruction following , and also favored CO-F ACT CHECKER for its reasoning and verdict quality , but reported several ties and instances of undesirable behavior in both protocols. The partic-ipants rated the practical usefulness of human–AI collaboration as 3.3 out of 5 on the Likert scale. We further asked the participants for open-ended qualitative feedback explaining their ratings: 

“The model gets lost in multi-turn dialogue. ” In multi-turn dialogue, the model occasionally forgot the claim and lost track of the task, producing only generic responses to user feedback and required explicit reminders to recover, thus increasing in-teraction overhead. In contrast, the participants did not report this issue for C O-F ACT CHECKER ,which integrated feedback directly into the initially proposed trace rather than accumulating a long dia-logue history, helping the model to retain the claim, the evidence, and the task constraints across feed-back turns. However, one participant noted a fail-ure mode in C O-F ACT CHECKER : it misinterpreted the feedback and applied incorrect trace-edits, af-ter which the reasoning trajectory went astray and was difficult to recover from. This highlights the need for more reliable feedback interpretation and recovery mechanisms while performing trace-edits. 

“The model does not realize that there is a world outside the retrieved evidence. ” In instances where the retrieved evidence was insufficient to ver-ify the claim, the model often failed to recognize this and instead treated the evidence as sufficient. This led to speculation about missing details and problematic verdicts, and made the model overly rigid to user guidance in both interaction settings. This degraded the reasoning and verdict quality 

and the instruction following capability of the model. The participants also emphasized that real-world fact-checking is iterative and highlighted the promise of collaborative systems with active evi-dence retrieval , where user feedback would prompt additional evidence retrieval and revision. 

“The model does an impressive job for some rea-soning steps, but does not understand some ba-sic things that a human would immediately spot. ”

Participants noted that while the model showed promising reasoning abilities in synthesizing evi-dence, it made basic errors, e.g., conflating direct speech with journalistic reinterpretation, leading to speculative reasoning. They emphasized that such mistakes are immediately apparent and unac-ceptable in fact-checking, where reasoning must be strictly evidence-based. These errors reduce the ef-fectiveness of human–AI collaboration: they force experts to correct fundamental mistakes rather than build on the model’s analysis. This highlights the need for reasoning models that are better aligned with fact-checking practices and capable of produc-ing acceptable reasoning with minimal feedback. 

8 Conclusion and Future Work 

Accurate verification of real-world claims is an expert-domain task, and, here, we posited human– AI collaboration as a more promising path forward. To this end, we presented C O-F ACT CHECKER , a framework for human–AI collaborative claim veri-fication that enables an expert and a model to co-construct a shared thinking trace through trace-editing . We provided theoretical proofs showing that trace-edits can dominate dialogue-based feed-back integration in expressivity and optimizability. Our automatic evaluations further showed that C O-FACT CHECKER outperforms existing autonomous and human–AI collaboration approaches; and hu-man evaluations showed that C O-F ACT CHECKER 

is preferred over multi-turn dialogue, producing higher quality verdicts along with relatively easier to interpret and more useful thinking traces. In future work, we plan to integrate feedback-driven evidence retrieval to better support the it-erative nature of real-world fact-checking, and to improve the underlying reasoning models to reduce the fundamental errors that limit effective collabo-ration. Beyond fact-checking, trace-editing offers a general interaction paradigm for reasoning tasks such as legal analysis and scientific review. Acknowledgment 

D.S., T.C. and P.N. would like to acknowledge the Multi-Institutional Faculty Interdisciplinary Research Project (MFIRP) between IIT Delhi and MBZUAI and Anusandhan National Research Foundation (DST/INT/USA/NSF-DST/Tanmoy/P-2/2024) for financial support. S.D. and I.G. would like to acknowledge the LOEWE Distin-guished Chair “Ubiquitous Knowledge Process-ing", LOEWE initiative, Hesse, Germany (Grant Number: LOEWE/4a//519/05/00.002(0002)/81). 

References 

Pheobe Arnold. 2020. The challenges of online fact checking: How technology can (and can’t) help - FullFact. Accessed: 29/12/2025. Anubrata Das, Houjiang Liu, Venelin Kovatchev, and Matthew Lease. 2023. The state of human-centered NLP technology for fact-checking. Information Processing & Manage-ment , 60(2):103219. Subhabrata Dutta, Timo Kaufmann, Goran Glavaš, Ivan Habernal, Kristian Kersting, Frauke Kreuter, Mira Mezini, Iryna Gurevych, Eyke Hüllermeier, and Hinrich Schütze. 2025. Prob-lem solving through Human–AI preference-based cooperation. Computational Linguistics ,pages 1–36. Lucas Graves. 2017. Anatomy of a fact check: Ob-jective practice and the contested epistemology of fact checking. Communication, Culture and Critique , 10(3):518–537. Zhijiang Guo, Michael Schlichtkrull, and Andreas Vlachos. 2022. A survey on automated fact-checking. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics , 10:178–206. Prerna Juneja and Tanushree Mitra. 2022. Hu-man and technological infrastructures of fact-checking. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction , Volume 6, Issue CSCW2(418):1–36. Seungone Kim, Juyoung Suk, Shayne Longpre, Bill Yuchen Lin, Jamin Shin, Sean Welleck, Gra-ham Neubig, Moontae Lee, Kyungjae Lee, and Minjoon Seo. 2024. Prometheus 2: An open source language model specialized in evaluating other language models. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Nat-ural Language Processing , EMNLP ’24, pages 4334–4353, Miami, Florida, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics. Wai-Chung Kwan, Xingshan Zeng, Yuxin Jiang, Yufei Wang, Liangyou Li, Lifeng Shang, Xin Jiang, Qun Liu, and Kam-Fai Wong. 2024. MT-eval: A multi-turn capabilities evaluation bench-mark for large language models. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , EMNLP ’24, pages 20153–20177, Miami, Florida, USA. As-sociation for Computational Linguistics. Yongchan Kwon, Shang Zhu, Federico Bianchi, Kaitlyn Zhou, and James Zou. 2025. Rea-sonIF: Large reasoning models fail to follow instructions during reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.15211 .Philippe Laban, Hiroaki Hayashi, Yingbo Zhou, and Jennifer Neville. 2025. LLMs get lost in multi-turn conversation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.06120 .Stephan Lewandowsky, John Cook, Ullrich K. H. Ecker, Dolores Albarracín, Michelle A. Amazeen, Panayiota Kendeou, Doug Lombardi, Eryn J. Newman, Gordon Pennycook, Ethan Porter, David G. Rand, David N. Rapp, Ja-son Reifler, Jon Roozenbeek, Philipp Schmid, Colleen M. Seifert, Gale M. Sinatra, Briony Swire-Thompson, Sander van der Linden, Emily K. Vraga, Thomas J. Wood, and Maria S. Zaragoza. 2020. The Debunking Handbook 2020 .Sunzhu Li, Zhiyu Lin, Shuling Yang, Jiale Zhao, and Wei Chen. 2025a. ThinkPilot: Steering rea-soning models via automated think-prefixes op-timization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.12063 .Xiaomin Li, Zhou Yu, Zhiwei Zhang, Xupeng Chen, Ziji Zhang, Yingying Zhuang, Narayanan Sadagopan, and Anurag Beniwal. 2025b. When thinking fails: The pitfalls of reasoning for instruction-following in LLMs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.11423 .Shalev Lifshitz, Sheila A. McIlraith, and Yilun Du. 2025. Multi-Agent verification: Scaling test-time compute with multiple verifiers. In The Second Conference on Language Modeling ,COLM ’25, Montreal, Canada. Hunter Lightman, Vineet Kosaraju, Yuri Burda, Harrison Edwards, Bowen Baker, Teddy Lee, Jan Leike, John Schulman, Ilya Sutskever, and Karl Cobbe. 2024. Let’s verify step by step. In 

The Twelfth International Conference on Learn-ing Representations , ICLR ’24, Vienna, Austria. Chin-Yew Lin. 2004. ROUGE: A package for auto-matic evaluation of summaries. In Text Summa-rization Branches Out , page 74–81, Barcelona, Spain. Association for Computational Linguis-tics. Jessy Lin, Nicholas Tomlin, Jacob Andreas, and Jason Eisner. 2024. Decision-oriented dialogue for human-AI collaboration. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics ,12:892–911. Zijun Liu, Peiyi Wang, Runxin Xu, Shirong Ma, Chong Ruan, Peng Li, Yang Liu, and Yu Wu. 2025. Inference-time scaling for generalist reward modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.02495 .Edoardo Loru, Jacopo Nudo, Niccolò Di Marco, Alessandro Santirocchi, Roberto Atzeni, Mat-teo Cinelli, Vincenzo Cestari, Clelia Rossi-Arnaud, and Walter Quattrociocchi. 2025. The simulation of judgment in LLMs. Proceed-ings of the National Academy of Sciences ,122(42):e2518443122. Bowen Lou, Tian Lu, T. S. Raghu, and Yingjie Zhang. 2025. Unraveling Human-AI team-ing: A review and outlook. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.05755 .Aman Madaan, Niket Tandon, Prakhar Gupta, Skyler Hallinan, Luyu Gao, Sarah Wiegreffe, Uri Alon, Nouha Dziri, Shrimai Prabhumoye, Yim-ing Yang, Shashank Gupta, Bodhisattwa Prasad Majumder, Katherine Hermann, Sean Welleck, Amir Yazdanbakhsh, and Peter Clark. 2023. Self-Refine: Iterative refinement with self-feedback. In Proceedings of the Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , NIPS ’23, pages 46534–46594, Red Hook, NY, USA. Curran Associates Inc. Nicholas Micallef, Vivienne Armacost, Nasir Memon, and Sameer Patil. 2022. True or False: Studying the work practices of profes-sional fact-checkers. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction , Volume 6, Is-sue CSCW1(127):1–44. Preslav Nakov, David Corney, Maram Hasanain, Firoj Alam, Tamer Elsayed, Alberto Barrón-Cedeño, Paolo Papotti, Shaden Shaar, and Gio-vanni Da San Martino. 2021. Automated fact-checking for assisting human fact-checkers. In 

Proceedings of the Thirtieth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI ’21 ,pages 4551–4558. International Joint Confer-ences on Artificial Intelligence Organization. Survey Track. Dhruv Sahnan, David Corney, Irene Larraz, Gio-vanni Zagni, Ruben Miguez, Zhuohan Xie, Iryna Gurevych, Elizabeth Churchill, Tanmoy Chakraborty, and Preslav Nakov. 2025. Can LLMs automate fact-checking article writing? 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.17684 .Yijia Shao, Vinay Samuel, Yucheng Jiang, John Yang, and Diyi Yang. 2025. Collaborative Gym: A framework for enabling and evaluat-ing Human-Agent collaboration. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.15701 .Snopes. 2025. Fact check ratings. Accessed: 29/12/2025. Nisan Stiennon, Long Ouyang, Jeff Wu, Daniel M. Ziegler, Ryan Lowe, Chelsea Voss, Alec Rad-ford, Dario Amodei, and Paul Christiano. 2020. Learning to summarize from human feedback. In Proceedings of the Thirty-fourth International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , NIPS ’20, pages 3008–3021, Red Hook, NY, USA. Curran Associates Inc. USA Today. 2025. USA TODAY fact check: Stan-dards and methodology. Accessed: 29/12/2025. Andreas Vlachos and Sebastian Riedel. 2014. Fact checking: Task definition and dataset construc-tion. In Proceedings of the ACL 2014 Workshop on Language Technologies and Computational Social Science , pages 18–22, Baltimore, MD, USA. Association for Computational Linguis-tics. Yuxia Wang, Revanth Gangi Reddy, Zain Muham-mad Mujahid, Arnav Arora, Aleksandr Ruba-shevskii, Jiahui Geng, Osama Mohammed Afzal, Liangming Pan, Nadav Borenstein, Aditya Pil-lai, Isabelle Augenstein, Iryna Gurevych, and Preslav Nakov. 2024. Factcheck-bench: Fine-grained evaluation benchmark for automatic fact-checkers. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2024 , pages 14199–14230, Miami, Florida, USA. Associa-tion for Computational Linguistics. Greta Warren, Irina Shklovski, and Isabelle Augen-stein. 2025. Show me the work: Fact-checkers’ requirements for explainable automated fact-checking. In Proceedings of the 2025 CHI Con-ference on Human Factors in Computing Sys-tems , Article No. 421, Yokohama, Japan. Asso-ciation for Computing Machinery. Jerry Wei, Chengrun Yang, Xinying Song, Yifeng Lu, Nathan Zixia Hu, Jie Huang, Dustin Tran, Daiyi Peng, Ruibo Liu, Da Huang, Cosmo Du, and Quoc V Le. 2024. Long-form factuality in large language models. In The Thirty-eighth An-nual Conference on Neural Information Process-ing Systems , NeurIPS ’24, Vancouver, Canada. Shirley Wu, Michel Galley, Baolin Peng, Hao Cheng, Gavin Li, Yao Dou, Weixin Cai, James Zou, Jure Leskovec, and Jianfeng Gao. 2025. CollabLLM: From passive responders to active collaborators. In The Forty-second International Conference on Machine Learning , ICML ’25, Vancouver, Canada. Zhuohan Xie, Rui Xing, Yuxia Wang, Jiahui Geng, Hasan Iqbal, Dhruv Sahnan, Iryna Gurevych, and Preslav Nakov. 2025. FIRE: Fact-checking with iterative retrieval and verification. In Find-ings of the Association for Computational Lin-guistics: NAACL 2025 , pages 2901–2914, Albu-querque, New Mexico. Association for Compu-tational Linguistics. Fengzhu Zeng and Wei Gao. 2024. JustiLM: Few-shot justification generation for explainable fact-checking of real-world claims. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics ,12:334–354. Dan Zhang, Sining Zhoubian, Ziniu Hu, Yisong Yue, Yuxiao Dong, and Jie Tang. 2024. ReST-MCTS*: LLM self-training via process reward guided tree search. In The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , NeurIPS ’24, Vancouver, Canada. Tianyi Zhang, Varsha Kishore, Felix Wu, Kilian Q. Weinberger, and Yoav Artzi. 2020. BERTScore: Evaluating text generation with BERT. In The International Conference on Learning Represen-tations , ICLR ’20, Virtual only. Xingsheng Zhang, Luxi Xing, Chen Zhang, Yan-bing Liu, Yifan Deng, Yunpeng Li, Yue Hu, and Chenxu Niu. 2025. Can we steer reasoning di-rection by thinking intervention? In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2025 , pages 3888–3913, Suzhou, China. Association for Computational Linguistics. Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Siyuan Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu, Yonghao Zhuang, Zi Lin, Zhuohan Li, Dacheng Li, Eric P. Xing, Hao Zhang, Joseph E. Gonzalez, and Ion Stoica. 2023. Judging LLM-as-a-judge with MT-bench and Chatbot Arena. In Proceedings of the Thirty-seventh International Conference on Neu-ral Information Processing Systems: Datasets and Benchmarks Track , NIPS ’23, pages 46595– 46623, Red Hook, NY, USA. Curran Associates Inc. Henry Peng Zou, Wei-Chieh Huang, Yaozu Wu, Yankai Chen, Chunyu Miao, Hoang Nguyen, Yue Zhou, Weizhi Zhang, Liancheng Fang, Langzhou He, Yangning Li, Dongyuan Li, Renhe Jiang, Xue Liu, and Philip S. Yu. 2025. LLM-based Human-Agent collaboration and in-teraction systems: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.00753 .Furkan ¸Sahinuç, Subhabrata Dutta, and Iryna Gurevych. 2025. Expert preference-based eval-uation of automated related work generation. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.07955 .Okay, so I need to fact-check the claim that Vice President Kamala Harris and her running mate Tim Walz announced a gun ban at an August 2024 rally. First, the NRA’s X post says Harris and Walz want to ban commonly owned firearms, but that might only be the NRA’s interpretation or a summary of what they believe, not direct proof. Next, August 2024 YouTube videos show both speaking at a Pennsylvania rally ... said that they would pursue background checks, red flag laws, and an assault weapons ban ... endorse common-sense gun violence laws while affirming the Second Amendment. NRA website articles from July 2024 argue that Harris threatens the Second Amendment citing her 2019 support for mandatory buybacks, but those articles predate the August rally. An October 2019 NBC News ... shows Harris supporting mandatory buyback ... but also predates the August rally by years. Putting this together: the August 2024 rally speeches show that Harris and Walz explicitly backed universal background checks, red flag laws, and an assault weapons ban if elected. Although they did not say “gun ban,” those policies would impose major restrictions on certain firearms. Their own remarks therefore support the claim. The NRA's claims also don't contradict their statements. 

Thinking Trace 

True Veracity Explanation 

The claim is supported by evidence from Kamala Harris and Tim Walz's speeches at the August 2024 rally. In their statements, they explicitly mentioned plans to pass an assault weapons ban if elected. This aligns with the claim that they announced a gun ban during the rally. Okay, so I need to address the user's request for direct quotes from Kamala Harris and Tim Walz's speeches at their August 2024 rally in Pennsylvania. The user prov--ided evidence that includes transcripts from YouTube videos where both candidates spoke about gun control measures. First, I should identify which parts of the transcripts are most relevant to the claim. From the EVIDENCE section, there are two URLs pointing to YouTube videos: 1. One where Kamala Harris talks about reasonable gun safety laws, expanding background checks, and support--ing universal background checks, red flag laws, and an assault weapons ban. 2. Another where Tim Walz mentions his support for common-sense gun violence laws while valuing the Second Amendment.\n\nI need to extract direct quotes from these transcripts that specifically mention banning firearms or implementing significant restrictions. From Kamala Harris's speech: - "Together, when we win in November, we are finally going to pass universal background checks, red flag laws, and an assault weapons ban." This quote directly mentions the plan to pass an assault weapons ban if elected, which is central to the claim. From Tim Walz's speech:- "We need reasonable gun safety laws... common-sense gun violence laws." While this doesn't explicitly mention a ban, it supports the idea of implementing significant restrictions on fire--arms. I should ensure that these quotes are accurately cited and reflect the context in which they were made. It's important to present them clearly so that anyone reading can understand how they support the claim. 

Thinking Trace Model Response 

Here are direct quotes from the transcripts of Kamala Harris and Tim Walz's speeches at their August 2024 rally in Pennsylvania: Kamala Harris: "Together, when we win in November, we are finally going to pass universal background checks, red flag laws, and an assault weapons ban." Tim Walz: "We need reasonable gun safety laws... common-sense gun violence laws." These statements directly address their stance on gun control measures, including the implementation of an assault weapons ban.. 

: 1. Quote directly from the transcript of speeches from Harris and Walz to put the claim into context. 

Expert Feedback 

Expert Autonomous Large Reasoning Model Multi-Turn Dialogue Interaction Okay, so I need to fact-check the claim that Vice President Kamala Harris and her running mate Tim Walz announced a gun ban at an August 2024 rally. First, the NRA's X post says ... interpretation or a summary of what they believe, not direct proof. Next, August 2024 YouTube videos show ... while affirming the Second Amendment. NRA website articles from July 2024 ... predate the August rally. An October 2019 NBC News report ... but also predates the August rally by years. Putting this together: the August 2024 ... would impose major restr--ictions on certain firearms. Their own remarks therefore support the claim. The NRA's claims also don't contradict their statements. Wait, I should quote exact words said by Kamala Harris and Tim Walz during their speech at the August 2024 rally. So, from the two YouTube videos and their transcripts, we have the following: Kamala Harris: "Together, when we win in November, we are fin--ally going to pass universal background checks, red flag laws, and an assault weapons ban." --- This directly corroborates the claim as Harris has specifically mentioned the plan to pass an assault weap--ons ban. Tim Walz: "We need reasonable gun safety laws and common-sense gun violence laws." --- This doesn't directly mention a gun ban, but it does support Harris' plan to implement significant restrictions on firearms. Putting it together, Kamala Harris and Tim Walz suggested a plan to implement restrictions on firearms including an assault weapons ban, which effectively amounts to a "gun ban". 

Thinking Trace Veracity True 

Explanation 

The claim is supported by evidence from Kamala Harris and Tim Walz's speeches at the August 2024 rally. In their statements, they explicitly mentioned plans to pass an assault weapons ban if elected. This aligns with the claim that they announced a gun ban during the rally. 

Co-FactChecker Figure 4: Additional sample run of the claim-verification task for a given claim. We show the response of the autonomous LRM, for which the expert provides some feedback. We see that the model forgets the original task (providing a verdict for the given claim) in the multi-turn dialogue setup, while C O-F ACT CHECKER integrates the expert feedback directly into the thinking trace through trace-editing, providing exact quotes by the two politicians as asked for in the expert feedback. 

A Running Examples 

In §1, we presented a running example of the fact-checking task for a given claim in Figure 1. We saw that the autonomous LRM constructed arguments from inauthentic evidence, overgeneralized its find-ings, and ultimately overstated the claim’s veracity. Expert feedback helped steer the model’s reasoning and improved the resulting verdict for the claim. However, in the multi-turn dialogue setting, the model failed to fully integrate all points from the expert feedback. Moreover, it produced fragmented reasoning, such that reconstructing the full analy-sis required aggregating information from thinking traces across two interactions. C O-F ACT CHECKER 

addressed these issues by treating the initial think-ing trace as a shared scratchpad between the user and the model, and by performing trace edits that directly incorporated expert feedback into the rea-soning process. Here, we provide an additional running exam-ple for the same claim in Figure 4. This example further illustrates the limitations of the multi-turn dialogue setup: after receiving expert feedback, the model failed to produce a verdict for the claim, despite verdict prediction being the original task. In contrast, C O-F ACT CHECKER did not expe-rience this failure mode in our experiments and integrated the expert’s feedback directly into the thinking trace using trace-edits. 

B Rubrics Used by The Editor’s Reward Model 

In §3, we explained that we pair our small LLM-based editor module with a custom reward model to enable the sampling-and-selection of relatively more accurate trace-edits. In particular, we used the Deepseek-GRM-16B (Liu et al., 2025), an LRM-based generalist reward model, which can reason and analyse an input to produce a reward. It also allows us to specify custom criteria to evaluate our sampled trace-edits on, to assign a reward to each one, and to choose the best one. We use the reward model for modification type trace-edits and to generate the sequence of guidance tokens g1, but not for removal. We list the specific criteria that we designed and used for this purpose in Table 3. We further supported the criteria with three manually crafted few-shot examples per criterion. Trace-edit Criteria Description 

Modify rea-soning step Correctness The argument must be logically sound, and be directly supported by the evidence provided. Adherence to feedback The argument must be consistent with the given feedback instruction, and align with the user’s specific requirements. Speculative nature The argument must not include any spec-ulations or assumptions that are not di-rectly and completely supported by the evidence provided. Focus on the claim The reasoning step must focus on verify-ing the exact claim, or another interpreta-tion of the claim that is equally or more threatful. The arguments and reasoning steps made must be directly related to the claim, and not to other context or inter-pretations which are less important. Append guid-ance tokens Adherence to feedback The string must be designed to nudge the verifier to focus on aspects specified in the feedback instruction, aligning with the user’s specific requirements. Focus on the claim The string must focus on nudging the model to analyze aspects that are directly related to the claim, and not to other con-text which is less important. 

Table 3: The criteria we used for the editor reward model to sample and select the trace-edits. We man-ually designed these criteria and provided them to the LRM-based generalist reward model to reason and to assign rewards to the trace-edits sampled by the editor. 

C Rubrics Used by the Oracle Module 

In §3, we introduced our oracle module that acts as a proxy for the human expert to enable automatic evaluations at scale. There, we also explained that the oracle module uses fine-grained grading rubrics (and the ground-truth as reference) to create an evaluation report for a given candidate solution and then translates it into a cohesive textual feedback. We list the specific evaluation criteria of this rubrics with their descriptions in Table 4. 

D Details: Reward Models for Test-Time Scaling on the Verifier 

In §6, we presented an ablation, where we applied test-time compute scaling strategies to the verifier 

V to push the limits of autonomous systems and to benchmark their performance on our task. For this, we designed a custom process reward model (PRM) and a custom output reward model (ORM) to implement the best-of-N and the Monte Carlo tree search scaling strategies. Similarly to the ed-itor’s reward model as discussed in §B, we used Deepseek-GRM-16B to design both the PRM and the ORM, as it allows us to specify custom criteria to generate a reward for a given instance. We list the specific criteria that we used for the PRM in Table 5 and for the ORM in Table 6. 

Criteria Evaluated Description Artifact 

Correctness Veracity 1. Does the predicted label match the ground truth? (Yes / No) 

2. Does the predicted label belong to the input veracity label set? (Yes / No) 

Justification Is the generated justification correct w.r.t the reference? (Correct / Incorrect) 

If not, provide feedback on how to im-prove it, based on the mistakes and miss-ing elements identified. (Natural Lan-guage Feedback) 

Each reason-ing step in the trace Is the reasoning step a contradiction to or inconsistent with the reasoning im-plied by the reference fact-checking ar-ticle or is it a speculation w.r.t the evi-dence? (Correct / Incorrect) 

If incorrect, provide feedback how to im-prove it or to completely remove it. (Nat-ural Language Feedback) 

Missing reasoning Trace Does the trace cover all key reasoning steps w.r.t the reference fact-checking ar-ticle? (Yes / No) 

If not, list the key steps missing from the trace. (List of key missing steps) 

Identifies harm potential Trace Does the trace identify how the claim could produce harm as implied in the ref-erence fact-checking article, and debunk it on those lines? (Yes / No) 

If not, provide feedback on what to fo-cus on to ensure the analysis covers this. 

(Natural Language Feedback) 

Focus on the claim in its exact wording Trace Does the trace analyse the claim in its exact wording apart from analysing its other possible interpretations? (Yes / No) 

If not, provide feedback on what to fo-cus on to ensure the analysis covers this. 

(Natural Language Feedback) 

Table 4: The questions and rubrics used by the or-acle module to evaluate a candidate solution. The oracle evaluates specific artifacts produced in the so-lution against several evaluation criteria as listed. The description provides an overview of the evaluation as-pect and the expected response. 

E Rubrics for LLM-as-a-Judge Evaluations 

In §6, we explained that we performed LLM-as-a-judge evaluations using Prometheus-2 as the evalu-ator LLM, and that we designed five-point rubrics to score the generated fact-checking explanations and the thinking traces on several evaluation cri-teria. Here, we present Table 7, which lists the particular rubrics we used in our evaluation on the two specific evaluation criteria that we addressed: 

Correctness and Comprehensibility .

F Details: Human Evaluations 

In §7, we presented human evaluations compar-ing interactions with C O-F ACT CHECKER against those in multi-turn dialogue across four evaluation criteria: verdict quality , usefulness of the thinking trace , instruction following , and perceived effort in collaboration .Criteria Description  

> Correctness The reasoning step must be logically sound, and be directly supported by the evidence provided. Speculative nature The reasoning step must not include any speculations or assumptions that are not directly and completely supported by the evidence provided. Focus on the claim The reasoning step must focus on verify-ing the exact claim, or another interpreta-tion of the claim that is equally or more threatful. The reasoning step made must be directly related to the claim, and not to other context or interpretations which are less important.

Table 5: The criteria we used for the process reward model. We manually designed these criteria and pro-vided them to the LRM-based generalist reward model to reason and to assign rewards to the reasoning steps for Monte Carlo tree search.       

> Criteria Description
> Correctness of the rea-soning steps All the reasoning steps must be logically sound, and be directly supported by the evidence provided. There must be no speculations in the reasoning steps. Focus on the claim The reasoning must focus on verifying the exact claim, or another interpretation of the claim that is equally or more threat-ful. The reasoning must be directly re-lated to the claim, and not to other con-text or interpretations which are less im-portant. Consistency b/w the rea-soning and the veracity label The veracity label must reflect all im-portant reasoning steps. If the reasoning implies mixed evidence (e.g., partly true and partly false), a fully “false” verdict without acknowledging the true compo-nent indicates inconsistency (either the reasoning is incorrect or the veracity la-bel is incorrect). Consistency b/w the reasoning and the fact-checking explanation The fact-checking explanation must re-flect all important reasoning steps. There must be no cherry-picking of the facts. If the trace provides multiple key reasoning steps but the explanation only reflects a subset (and ignores others), the explana-tion is likely incomplete, or the reasoning has problems.

Table 6: The criteria we used to design the output reward model. We manually designed these criteria and provided them to the LRM-based generalist reward model to reason and to assign rewards to the model’s responses. 

We also asked the participants to rate the prac-tical usefulness of human–AI collaboration to ex-pedite professional fact-checking on a 5-point Lik-ert scale, as well as their overall preference be-tween C O-F ACT CHECKER and multi-turn dialogue. For this, we prepared a web application where the participants interacted with the verifier for three rounds of feedback under the two interaction proto-cols. Here, we present the instructions provided to the participants, the questions we asked for compar-ison between C O-F ACT CHECKER and multi-turn dialogue, and screenshots of the web application we designed. 

F.1 Instructions to the Participants 

Table 8 presents the instructions given to the partic-ipants for the human evaluation study. 

F.2 Questions Asked for Comparison 

Table 9 presents the questions that we asked for comparison on each evaluation criterion. Each question had four options that the participants could choose from: ( a) C O-F ACT CHECKER , ( b) multi-turn dialogue, ( c) tie, and ( d) undesirable behavior from both frameworks. Table 10 presents the ques-tion and rubrics we used to ask participants to rate the practical usefulness of human–AI collaboration for claim verification on a five-point Likert scale. 

F.3 The Interface 

Figure 5 presents screenshots from the web appli-cation interface, which we developed to facilitate interaction between the participants and the model over the two interaction protocols. In particular, Figure 5 (a) gives an overview of the interaction interface where the participants are presented with the model’s responses, and where they provide natural language feedback into the chat boxes. It also lists the retrieved evidence that was used to propose a verdict for the given claim. Figure 5 (b) shows the overlay that prompts the participants with the questions to compare the two protocols on each evaluation criterion. Artifact Criteria Question & Rubrics Explanation Correctness Q. Does the explanation correctly clarify the claim according to the reference answer? 

Score 1: The explanation is incorrect, it misses most of the important context, and is unable to put the claim into proper context compared to the reference answer. Score 2: The explanation is mostly incorrect and misses important context according to the reference answer. Score 3: The explanation is partially correct but misses some context present in the reference answer. Score 4: The explanation is mostly correct and puts the claim into context well according to the reference answer, but misses some small details. Score 5: The explanation is correct and puts the claim correctly into context according to the reference answer. 

Comprehensibility Q. Is the explanation easy to understand as a justification for the verdict on the claim? 

Score 1: The explanation is poorly written and it is unclear what the main point or conclusion about the claim is. Score 2: The explanation is hard to follow, it is poorly structured or confusing in places, and it does not clearly connect the verdict for the claim to the facts. Score 3: The explanation is not fully clear, but one can understand how the facts connect to the verdict for the claim with some effort. Score 4: The explanation is mostly clear and is easy to follow, but some parts lack clarity and could be better structured. Score 5: The explanation is clearly written and it is easy to understand how the facts lead to the conclusion about the claim’s verdict. 

Thinking Trace Correctness Q. Does the thinking trace construct correct reasoning steps to verify the claim according to the reference answer? 

Score 1: The reasoning steps are incorrect: they are either contradictory to those in the reference answer or speculative, and the trace does not align with the reasoning implied by the reference answer. Score 2: The reasoning steps are mostly incorrect: several are wrong, contradictory to those in the reference answer or speculative, and it misses important reasoning steps needed to match the reference answer. Score 3: The reasoning steps are partially correct: some of them align with the reference answer, but also some may be speculations, may contain minor inaccuracies according to the reference answer, or may miss some important reasoning steps. Score 4: The reasoning steps are mostly correct: they are supported by the reasoning in the reference answer, but there may be minor errors or some missing steps compared to the reference answer. Score 5: The reasoning steps are correct: they align with the reasoning implied by the reference answer, and they cover all reasoning steps present in the reference answer. 

Comprehensibility Q. Is the thinking trace easy to follow as a step-by-step decision-making record for the claim? 

Score 1: The thinking trace is very hard to follow as it is chaotic, and it is unclear how the reasoning steps lead to the decision on the claim’s verdict. Score 2: The thinking trace is hard to follow as it is poorly organized; the reasoning steps are repetitive and not clearly connected to each other or to the final decision about the claim’s verdict. Score 3: The thinking trace is somewhat understandable, but one needs to put in some effort to interpret the full decision record properly. Score 4: The thinking trace is fairly easy to follow as the reasoning steps are presented in a logical and coherent order, clearly leading to the decision about the claim’s verdict, but there may be some repetition, or a few unclear transitions. Score 5: The thinking trace is clearly written and easy to follow, making it easy to interpret the full decision record. 

Table 7: The questions and rubrics used in our LLM-as-a-judge evaluations. We used Prometheus-2 (7B) as the evaluator LLM to judge the generated explanations and thinking traces. 

Instructions 

The participant will be asked to verify a claim in collaboration with a large reasoning model: the model will propose a veracity for the given claim, and a fact-checking explanation. The model will also present the rationale behind its decision in the form of a decision-making process. The participant will then validate the quality and correctness of the verdict and the decision-making process, and provide feedback to the model to improve the solution iteratively. We request participants to treat the evidence provided in the web application interface as sufficient to complete the claim verification task. To facilitate this collaboration, we have developed a web application interface that will be used by the participant to interact with the model. The participant will interact with the LLM in two human-in-the-loop settings: ( a) multi-turn conversational dialogue (as the name suggests or ChatGPT-like interactions), and ( b) trace-editing (where the model’s decision making process will be revised in-place based on your feedback and a new verdict will be produced). The participant is required to interact with the model on both interaction settings for a total of three feedback rounds. 

Evaluation: After each feedback round, the participant will be prompted with a set of 5 questions to compare both interaction settings against each other across four evaluation criteria. After the final feedback round, the participant will be prompted with two additional questions to rate the practical usefulness of human–AI collaboration for claim-verification on a five-point Likert scale, and their overall preference for the interaction framework, from the two they interacted with, to facilitate the collaboration. 

Claims that will be used: We have collected a set of 14 claims recently fact-checked by prominent fact-checking organizations. For each human evaluation, one claim will be randomly picked from the set and used for that participant. 

Expected time: 30-40 minutes 

Note: In some cases, the web application can take a long time to generate a new response based on the participant’s feedback. We request the participant to kindly allow up to 10 minutes to let the response generate. If it still isn’t resolved, the participant is requested to restart the evaluation by refreshing the web application. 

Table 8: Instructions to participants for the human evaluation study. (a) (b) Figure 5: The web application interface for human evaluations. Figure (a) shows the interaction interface, where the participants interact with the model in the two interaction protocols, namely Framework A (C O-F ACT CHECKER )and Framework B (multi-turn dialogue). Figure (b) shows the overlay that prompts the participants with the questions to compare the two protocols on each evaluation criterion. Criteria Description 

Reasoning and verdict quality 

Q. Did the quality of the documented de-cision making process and the verdict im-prove with your feedback? If so, which framework’s solution quality is better? Usefulness of the think-ing trace 

Q. The decision-making process from which framework is better for explain-ing the claim and the surrounding narra-tive, as well as for supporting later stages of the fact-checking process, for eg., for writing fact-checking articles? Instruction following 

Q. Which framework was better at fol-lowing your feedback and updating its decision making process and verdict? Perceived effort for the collabora-tion 

Q1. How would you rate your cogni-tive load while trying to perceive the complete decision making process of the model? For which framework was it eas-ier? 

Q2. For which framework was it easier for you to guide the system toward a bet-ter solution, in terms of perceiving the initial solution, giving feedback to refine it, and validating the improved output? Overall pref-erence 

Q. Which interaction framework would you prefer for claim verification in a human–AI collaboration setting? 

Table 9: The questions we used for comparison be-tween C O-F ACT CHECKER and multi-turn dialogue in our human evaluations. 

Criteria Description 

Practical use-fulness of human–AI collaboration 

Q. Do you think a human-AI collabo-ration framework would help in mak-ing the claim verification task faster by using large language models or large reasoning models? 

5: Definitely. 4: Mostly yes. 3: It has potential. 2: Unlikely. 1: Mostly not. 

Table 10: The question and rubrics for assessing the practical usefulness of human–AI collaboration for claim verification.