Title: Revisiting Semantic Role Labeling: Efficient Structured Inference with Dependency-Informed Analysis

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.02505v1

Published Time: Tue, 05 May 2026 01:56:56 GMT

Number of Pages: 13

Markdown Content:
# Revisiting Semantic Role Labeling: Efficient Structured Inference with Dependency-Informed Analysis 

Sangpil Youm, Leah Jones, Bonnie J. Dorr 

University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida 

{youms,leahjones,bonniejdorr}@ufl.edu 

Abstract 

Semantic Role Labeling (SRL) provides an explicit representation of predicate-argument structure, capturing linguistically grounded re-lations such as who did what to whom . While recent NLP progress has been dominated by large language models (LLMs), these systems often rely on implicit semantic representations, often lacking explicit structural constraints and systematic explanatory mechanisms. Tradi-tionally, SRL systems have often relied on AllenNLP; however, the framework entered maintenance mode in December 2022, limiting compatibility with evolving encoder architec-tures and modern inference requirements. We revisit structured SRL modeling, introducing a modernized encoder-based framework that preserves explicit predicate-argument structure while enabling inference 10 × faster. Using BERT-base, the model attains comparable pre-dictive performance, and RoBERTa and De-BERTa further improve F1 performance within the same framework. We adopt a dependency-informed diagnostic methodology to character-ize span-level inconsistencies and conduct a representation-level analysis of LLM behavior under dependency-informed structural signals. Results indicate that dependency cues primarily improve structural stability. Finally, we illus-trate how the framework’s explicit predicate-argument structure can support multilingual SRL projection as a downstream application. 

1 Introduction 

Semantic role labeling (SRL) identifies an explicit representation of predicate-argument structure, cap-turing linguistically grounded relations, i.e., who did what to whom . For example:                 

> • [ ARG0 OpenAI] released [ARG1 a new language model] [ ARGM-TMP in March]. • [ ARG0 The research team] evaluated [ARG1 its multi-lingual SRL performance] [ ARGM-LOC on the Uni-versal PropBank dataset]. • [ ARG1 The model] was fine-tuned [ARG0 by engi-neers] [ ARGM-MNR using dependency constraints].
> Figure 1: Overview of the revisiting SRL framework. Sentence-level encoding reuse enables efficient predicate-conditioned inferences across modern encoder architectures. Dependency-informed diagnosis characterizes span-level er-rors, and representation-level analysis investigates depen-dency effects. The framework further supports representation-consistent cross-lingual SRL transfer as a downstream appli-cation.

Following Bonial et al. (2014), a predicate is assumed to be a verb, noun, adverb, or adjective (e.g., afraid of bears ), although we focus here on verbs (italicized above). Typical SRL labels are agent (ARG0), theme (ARG1), recipient or sec-ondary argument (ARG2), and modifier (ARGM-TMP/LOC/MNR, etc.). Due to its linguistic importance, SRL has long been a core NLP benchmark, appearing as shared tasks at CoNLL (Carreras and Màrquez, 2005; Ha-jiˇ c et al., 2009; Pradhan et al., 2012) This trajec-tory reflects broader shifts in modeling paradigms, from early statistical systems (He et al., 2017; Li et al., 2019) to span-based neural approaches using larger datasets, e.g., PropBank and FrameNet (Co-nia et al., 2022) and transformer encoders (Fei et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2022). The span-based AllenNLP SRL model (Gardner et al., 2018), based on Shi and Lin (2019), achieves high accuracy and supports various NLP tasks, in-cluding named entity recognition (NER), corefer-ence resolution, and SRL. However, AllenNLP en-tered maintenance mode in December 2022, lim-iting compatibility with evolving encoder archi-tectures and modern inference requirements. This obsolescence constrains the deployment of SRL in downstream tasks where predicate-argument fea-tures remain valuable—for example, stance detec-tion (Mather et al., 2022), sentiment analysis (Klen-

> arXiv:2605.02505v1 [cs.CL] 4 May 2026

ner and Göhring, 2022), summarization (Fan et al., 2023), and cross-lingual SRL projection (Youm et al., 2024). More broadly, they expose a gap between advances in semantic representation learn-ing and the computational efficiency required for large-scale structured inference. To overcome these integration barriers, we re-visit structured SRL modeling by introducing a modernized encoder-based framework (see Fig-ure 1). This design eliminates redundant per-predicate instance generation by caching sentence-level representations and reusing them across pred-icates, yielding 10 × faster inference while pre-serving predictive performance. Using BERT-base, the model attains comparable performance (86.2%; AllenNLP: 86.72%), while RoBERTa (Liu et al., 2019) and DeBERTa (He et al., 2020) further im-prove predictive performance (87.07%, 87.49%). Across all evaluated encoder backbones, our frame-work remains faster than AllenNLP. Beyond efficiency and predictive gains, the framework contributes (1) a dependency-informed diagnostic methodology for span boundary in-consistencies and structurally explainable devia-tions; (2) a representation-level analysis of how dependency-informed structural signals influence LLM SRL predictions, showing improvements in structural stability; and (3) seamless integration with cross-lingual SRL projection pipelines. These contributions collectively reposition SRL as a structurally grounded, computationally ef-ficient, and representation-consistent framework, aligning explicit predicate-argument modeling with modern encoder architectures, emerging LLM paradigms, and multilingual SRL transfer. 1

2 Related Work 

SRL research spans two decades, evolving from syntax-driven models to neural span encoders, and more recently LLMs. This evolution reflects broader shifts in NLP modeling paradigms while preserving the core objective of explicit predicate-argument structure representation. To situate our contributions, we review prior work along four dimensions: structured SRL foundations, BERT-based architectures and the AllenNLP framework, LLM-based SRL, and cross-lingual SRL transfer. These threads contextualize our revisiting of struc-tured SRL modeling, emphasizing efficiency, struc- 

> 1Our Modernized SRL is at: https://anonymous.4open. science/r/modernized_SRL-CF96

tural consistency, and explanatory adequacy within a dependency-informed, multilingual framework. 

2.1 Structured SRL Foundations 

Early SRL models have emphasized syntactic and lexical cues. Through a series of CoNLL shared tasks (Carreras and Màrquez, 2005; Hajiˇ c et al., 2009; Pradhan et al., 2012) , these approaches have evolved into neural architectures that incorporate dependency-path features (FitzGerald et al., 2015; Roth and Lapata, 2016; He et al., 2018). Most systems adopt PropBank conventions, assigning ARG0 to the agent, ARG1 to the theme, and ARG2 to the recipient. Over time, these have gradually been replaced by feature engineering with con-textual embeddings such as ELMo (Peters et al., 2018) and the strong pre-trained baselines like GloVe (Stanovsky et al., 2018). 

2.2 BERT-based and AllenNLP SRL 

Transformer-based architectures such as BERT (Devlin et al., 2019) have allowed for span-level BIO tagging as in Conia et al. (2022). BERT-based models (Shi and Lin, 2019; Fei et al., 2021) per-form strongly via contextual embeddings and span-level decoding. AllenNLP (Gardner et al., 2018) generalizes this design for broad community use, integrating SRL, NER, coreference, and parsing. Building on these advances, Shi and Lin (2019) implement a BERT-LSTM model that captures predicates using the [SEP] token, becoming the ba-sis of AllenNLP’s SRL implementation. However, post-2022 dependency and package incompatibili-ties have limited continued integration with modern frameworks such as spaCy (Honnibal and Montani, 2025) and PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2019). Our work revisits this encoder-based modeling framework, eliminating redundant per-predicate instance gen-eration, improving inference efficiency, and intro-ducing dependency-informed diagnostics for sys-tematic structural analysis. 

2.3 SRL in the LLM Era 

While LLMs excel at sequence modeling, explicit predicate–argument structure remains indispens-able for faithfulness, controllability, cross-lingual transfer, and interpretability. SRL makes seman-tic relations explicit—still challenging for LLMs despite their fluency in text generation. Recent studies show that achieving competitive SRL performance with LLMs requires substantial structural scaffolding, including retrieval mecha-nisms, frame descriptions, and iterative correction strategies (Li et al., 2025). These findings sug-gest that structured semantic representations do not reliably emerge from generative inference alone. Prior studies indicate that LLMs struggle to assign consistent semantic roles across domains and lan-guages without an auxiliary mechanism (Wu et al., 2022), and even advanced models (e.g., GPT-4) attain only partial accuracy as PropBank annota-tors (Bonn et al., 2024). Thus, structured role inven-tories such as PropBank (Jindal et al., 2022) and Universal PropBank (UP) (Pradhan et al., 2022) remain indispensable intermediate representations for reasoning and semantic transfer. Comparative analyses show that models preserv-ing predicate-argument boundaries offer greater interpretability and compositional generalization than purely end-to-end LLMs (Zhang et al., 2022; Shi and Lin, 2020). The recent survey by Chen et al. (2025) notes renewed interest in structured semantics as a complement to foundation models. SRL thus bridges symbolic semantics and neural contextualization, providing interpretable scaffold-ing for faithful semantic reasoning. Building on this perspective, we revisit struc-tured SRL modeling, introducing a modernized encoder-based framework that achieves compara-ble predictive performance with 10 × faster infer-ence using BERT-base, while RoBERTa and De-BERTa provide further gains. The framework in-tegrates dependency-informed diagnostics for sys-tematic structural analysis and representation-level evaluation of LLM behavior under explicit struc-tural signals. 

2.4 Cross-lingual SRL Transfer 

Cross-lingual SRL transfer is now a central re-search focus, as annotated data remain scarce for most languages. However, such transfer inherently carries over annotation error and structural incon-sistencies from English data to the target language. Our approach addresses this problem by detecting structural errors in English source sentences using a dependency-aware error detection method, im-proving the quality of cross-lingual SRL projection in downstream settings. Prior approaches such as divergence-aware SRL projection (Youm et al., 2024) and zero-shot con-versational SRL (Wu et al., 2022) highlight the persistent challenge of maintaining consistent ar-gument structures across typologically diverse cor-pora. Resources such as Universal PropBank 2.0 and PropBank’s latest multilingual frames (Prad-han et al., 2022) now facilitate unified role map-pings. These resources support and align with our model’s dependency-aware design for cross-lingual expansion. 

3 Structured SRL Framework 

We fine-tune and evaluate our framework on CoNLL-2012. This section describes the dataset and the processing pipeline. 

3.1 Data 

We adopt the English portion of the CoNLL-2012 Shared Task dataset (Pradhan et al., 2012) derived from OntoNotes 5.0 (Weischedel et al., 2013), us-ing the official train, development, and test splits for benchmark consistency. The dataset provides span-based semantic role annotations grounded in PropBank, enabling systematic investigation of predicate-argument boundary prediction and struc-tural consistency. 2

CoNLL-2012 is selected due to its span-level formulation of semantic roles, which aligns with our framework’s emphasis on structural adequacy, argument-boundary stability, and dependency-informed diagnostics. This contrasts with token-level formulations such as CoNLL-2009, which target a different granularity of SRL. 

3.2 Model 

To construct the encoder-based structured SRL model, we condition the input on the predicate by appending a dedicated predicate span to the sen-tence representation: 

[CLS]|sent|[SEP]|pred|[SEP] 

Here sent and pred denote the sentence and pred-icate tokens, respectively. We follow AllenNLP training paradigm to ensure comparability, but di-verge at inference time by eliminating redundant per-predicate sentence encoding. AllenNLP con-structs a separate instances for each predicate, re-sulting in repeated sentence tokenization and en-coder recomputation. In contrast, our framework performs a single sentence-level tokenization and encoder pass and reuses them across all predicates in the sentence. For comparison with our approach, we present Algorithm 1 to illustrate the code underlying Al-lenNLP’s per-predicate encoding system. 3

> 2Dataset creation details are provided in Appendix A.
> 3AllenNLP’s per-predicate encoding approach is openly

Algorithm 1 Original AllenNLP: Per-Predicate Encoding 1: function TEXT TOINSTANCE (tokens, labels )

2: sent ← HFE NCODE (tokens )

3: pred ← HFE NCODE (SELECT (tokens, labels =1)) 

4: ids ← [CLS ]|sent| [SEP ]|pred| [SEP ]

5: tt ← [0] 1+ |sent| +1 ∥[1] |pred| +1 ; am ← [1] |ids |

6: return INSTANCE (MAKE FIELDS (ids, tt, am, labels, tokens )) 

7: function PREDICT SRL( model, tokenizer, inputs, p _idxs )

8: IN ST S ← [ ]; P ← [ ] 

9: for p ∈ p_idxs do 

10: labels ← ONE HOT (|inputs |, p )

11: inst ← TEXT TOINSTANCE (inputs, labels )

12: PUSH (IN ST S, inst ); P USH (P, v _idxs )

13: OU T ← FORWARD INSTANCES (model, IN ST S )

14: return PACK BYSENTENCE (OU T, P ) 

> •

Line 1: Define TextToInstance — a helper function responsible for constructing a per-predicate instance for semantic role labeling (SRL).  

> •

Line 2–3: Encode the input tokens into subword IDs (sent ) using the Hugging Face tokenizer ( HFEncode ). Select and encode the predicate token ( pred ).  

> •

Lines 4–5: Construct the model input se-quence: concatenate predicate with the sentence, 

[CLS]|sent|[SEP]|pred|[SEP] ; assign segment IDs (tt ) to distinguish sentence and predicate parts (0 for 

sent , 1 for pred ); create the attention mask ( am ) to indicate valid tokens.  

> •

Line 6: Return a structured INSTANCE object containing the constructed fields ( ids , tt , am , labels , and tokens )for downstream modeling, and end of the function.  

> •

Line 7: Define PredictSRL(model, tokenizer, inputs, p_idxs) — the main SRL inference routine, which processes input sentences and predicate indices.  

> •

Line 8: Initialize an empty list of per-predicate instances (INSTS ) and a mapping of predicates to their source sen-tences ( P).  

> •

Lines 9–12: Iterate over all predicate indices. For each predicate position p: create a one-hot label vec-tor ( labels ); build a per-predicate instance using 

TextToInstance function (line 1-7); append the in-stance to INSTS . 

> •

Line 13: Perform a forward pass over the model with all instances ( INSTS ) to generate per-predicate predictions (OUT ).  

> •

Line 14: Regroup predictions by their original sentences using PackBySentence(OUT, P) and return the final output: a list of SRL-labeled, BIO-marked sentences. 

Algorithm 2 presents our modernized infer-ence design, which decouples sentence encoding from predicate-conditioned prediction. A single sentence-level encoding pass is performed, ensur-ing consistent token indices across all predicate-conditioned structures within a sentence. The cached sentence representation is reused to con-struct predicate-conditioned inputs. Importantly, each predicate still receives a predicate-conditioned contextualized encoder representation, preserving predicate-specific modeling capacity while elimi-nating redundant preprocessing. 

available: https://docs.allennlp.org/models/main/ models/structured_prediction/predictors/srl/ .

Algorithm 2 Our Approach: Modernized SRL 1: function ENCODE SENTENCE ONCE (inputs, tokenizer )

2: wp ← tokenizer (inputs, split = T, specials = F )

3: sent ← FLATTEN (wp.ids )

4: f _wp _idxs ← FIRST POS PER WORD (wp.word _ids () , +1) 

5: return (sent, f _wp _idxs )

6: function PREDICT SRL( model, tokenizer, inputs, p _idxs )

7: (sent, f _wp _idxs ) ← ENCODE SENTENCE ONCE 

> (inputs, tokenizer )

8: for p ∈ p_idxs do 

9: IDS, T T, W F, AM, P ← [ ] 

10: pred ← FLATTEN (TOKENIZER (inputs [p])) 

11: ids ← [CLS ]|sent| [SEP ]|pred| [SEP ]

12: tt ← [0] 1+ |sent| +1 ∥ [1] |pred| +1 , am ← [1] |ids |

13: PUSH (IDS, ids ); PUSH (T T, tt ); PUSH (AM, am ); 

14: PUSH (P, p ); PUSH (W F, f _wp _idx )

15: IN P U T S ← PAD AND STACK (IDS, T T, AM )

16: OU T ← FORWARD (model, IN P U T S, P, W F )

17: return PACK BYSENTENCE (OU T, P ) 

> •

Line 1: Define EncodeSentenceOnce —a helper func-tion that performs sentence-level encoding once, avoding redundant recomputation across predicates.  

> •

Lines 2–5: Perform sentence-level encoding and pre-processing: tokenize into wordpieces, flatten token IDs, and record first wordpiece indices. Then, return pre-processed sentence representation ( sent ) and wordpiece index mapping ( f_wp_idxs ).  

> •

Line 6: Define main SRL inference func-tion— (PredictSRL(model, tokenizer, inputs, v_idxs) . 

> •

Line 7: Encode the sentence once using 

EncodeSentenceOnce (line 1-7) to avoid reun-dant sentence-level encoding and improve efficiency.  

> •

Lines 8–14: Iterate over each predicate and build model inputs: initialize empty containers, IDS , TT , WF , AM , and 

P; tokenize the predicate span; and construct full input by concatenating the reused sentence token IDs with pred-icate token ID, [CLS]|sent|[SEP]|pred|[SEP] ; build segment IDs (0 for sent , 1 for pred ); create the attention mask ( am ) to indicate valid tokens.  

> •

Line 15: Combine the per-predicate input tensors into a batch with PadAndStack(IDS, TT, AM) for model inference.  

> •

Line 16: Perform the forward pass: OUT ←

Forward(model, INPUTS, P, WF) , producing contextu-alized token representations that are mapped to predicate-specific logits.  

> •

Line 17: Regroup predictions by their original sentences using PackBySentence(OUT, P) and return the final output: a list of SRL-labeled, BIO-marked sentences. 

Although sentence-level representations are shared, predicate-specific distinctions are introduced via the predicate span and segment embeddings, en-suring that argument predictions remain predicate-conditioned rather than sentence-global. We next evaluate the predictive performance and efficiency of our model on benchmark data. 

4 Experiments and Results 

We follow the AllenNLP SRL configuration based on the SRL-BERT model by Shi and Lin (2019). The LSTM and MLP hidden dimensions are 768 and 300, respectively, with a predicate indicator embedding size of 10. Using a BERT-base-cased encoder and a learning rate of 5×10 −5, we conduct all experiments on AMD EPYC 9655P (3 CPUs) and NVIDIA DGX B200 machines (1 GPU). On the test set (11,289 sentences), our model runs 10 × faster (1.32 min vs. 13.18 min) than the AllenNLP baseline, with nearly identical ac-curacy. These sentences potentially contain more than one clause and average 26 tokens, totaling 32,617 clause-level predictions and 877,873 to-kens. At the phrase level, we achieve a comparable F1: 86.15% (ours) vs. 86.72% (AllenNLP’s), with Precision/Recall scores of 85.98/86.32% (ours) vs. 86.81/86.63% (AllenNLP). Table 1 summarizes these results.                     

> Metric Our Model (BERT) Our Model (RoBERTa) Our Model (DeBERTa) AllenNLP P (%) 85.98 86.19 86.78 86.81 R (%) 86.32 87.97 88.22 86.63 F1 (%) 86.15 87.07 87.49 86.72 Time (m) 1.36 5.36 7.57 13.18
> Table 1: Comparison of our modernized BERT-based SRL model and AllenNLP on the OntoNotes 5.0 test set, showing comparable accuracy with a 10 ×speedup.

We use BERT-based model as the primary com-parison model against AllenNLP because BERT represents the community-standard baseline trans-former encoder for SRL and offers the most ef-ficient inference speed among the evaluated en-coders. RoBERTa and DeBERTa are included to assess performance sensitivity to backbone choice. Across encoder variants, predictions exhibit high agreement with AllenNLP outputs (BERT: 95.2%, RoBERTa: 97.97%, DeBERTa: 94.99%) Of the 877,873 tokens, 841,002 tokens (95.2%) match AllenNLP outputs on the same unseen test set, confirming replication fidelity. The remaining 4.8% (42,174 tokens) represent token-level mis-matches analyzed next. Table 2 presents a breakdown of the distribution of these predictions relative to the OntoNotes 5.0 ground truth, distinguishing between agreement and disagreement cases, as well as whether each system is correct. Among agreement cases—where both systems produce identical outputs—88.49% are correct (accounting for 84.24% of the total), and 11.51% are incorrect (10.96% of the total). In the disagreement cases, 43.96% of AllenNLP’s predictions are correct (2.11% of the total), and 29.29% of our system are correct (1.41% of the total). The remaining 26.75% (1.28% of the total) are cases where neither system is correct.                  

> Partition Subcase % within partition % of total
> Agreement (95.20%) Both correct 88.49% 84.24% Both wrong 11.51% 10.96% Disagreement (4.80%) Allen correct 43.96% 2.11% Ours correct 29.29% 1.41% Neither correct 26.75% 1.28%
> Table 2: Prediction outcomes relative to the ground truth are divided into agreement (835,699 tokens), where both systems produce identical predictions, and disagreement (42,174 to-kens), where their outputs diverge. Within the agreement set (95.2% of the total), both systems are correct for 734,415 tokens (88.49% of the within agreement). Within the disagree-ment set, AllenNLP is correct for 18,539 tokens (43.96%), and our system for 12.352 tokens (29.29%).

5 Analysis and Remediation 

Although overall performance is strong, under-standing residual errors is essential. To analyze mismatches, we employ a dependency-aware an-alyzer that automatically merges repeated spans when possible, and flags the rest for human re-view. This process resolves a measurable subset of mismatches and systematically categorizes the rest. Fine-grained character-, token-, and span-level comparisons make manual review impracti-cal. Our analyzer distinguishes between automatic and human-resolvable errors, thereby enhancing the structural interpretability of model behavior. Before detailing the dependency-aware error de-tection framework, we first examine which seman-tic role categories are most frequently missed in the 5% of predictions where our system and Al-lenNLP diverge. This analysis lays the foundation for characterizing the sources of residual errors. 

5.1 Analysis of Missing Roles in Ours and AllenNLP 

We investigate missed arguments via one-to-one comparisons between our system and AllenNLP outputs, evaluated against the OntoNotes 5.0 ground truth. Relative to our system, ARGM ac-counts for 48.05% of differences across argument categories. Core roles ARG0-ARG2 together ac-count for 48.77% of mismatches, with ARG1 and ARG2 most prominent. Among ARGMs , ARGM-ADV 

(adverbial modifier) represents the largest share of discrepancies (28.33%), followed by ARGM-MNR 

(11.97%) and ARGM-TMP , with ARGM-LOC forming the next substantial portion. 4

We next present role-wise differences rela-tive to AllenNLP, evaluated against the ground 

> 4Full diagnostic distributions are provided in Appendix B.

truth. The largest share of missing labels is ARGM 

(48.10%). The core roles ARG0 , ARG1 , and ARG2 

together represent 48.42% of differences. Within 

ARGMs , a small subset of adjunct types dominates missing labels: ARGM-ADV (25.72%), ARGM-PRD 

(13.13%), followed by ARGM-MNR , ARGM-TMP , and 

ARM-LOC —accounting for over 75% of ARGM-related omissions. 5

While this analysis identifies dominant omis-sion patterns, it does not explain the structural causes. The next section, therefore, introduces a dependency-aware diagnostic framework to exam-ine span-level sources of inconsistency. 

5.2 Dependency-Aware Error Analysis 

Our model predicts span-based semantic roles, and some errors arise from BIO tagging mistakes that result in span violations. In particular, we detect cases where the beginning of an argument is in-correctly assigned multiple times to the same se-mantic role, as illustrated here for B-ARG0 . Our analyzer identifies and corrects errors by enforcing proper span boundaries using dependency informa-tion. The opening bracket ( “[” ) marks the start of a span, and all subsequent tokens within that span receive I-tags until the closing bracket (“ ]”).       

> [B-ARG0: temperament] [B-ARG0: through I-ARG0: study I-ARG0: and I-ARG0: practice]

Among 4.8% of divergent predictions between Al-lenNLP and our system, span violations account for 3.8% of all spans in all systems’ predictions (17,387 spans) and 3.79% of all spans in the Al-lenNLP outputs (19,131 spans). In both systems, 

ARGM-ADJ exhibits the highest number of span vio-lations, representing 16.67% of such cases in our model and 10.00% in AllenNLP. Because PropBank-style annotation prohibits duplicate argument roles per predicate (e.g., two ARG0 spans for the same verb) (Jurafsky and Mar-tin, 2025), repeated spans for the same semantic role are structurally invalid. This constraint—long established in linguistic theory—requires that each argument occur only once per predicate. Thus, when our system produces multiple spans for the same role, it merges them into a single continuous argument span to satisfy this constraint. In such cases, the first token carries the B tag, and all subsequent tokens carry the I tag, rather than restarting with B, as illustrated below:        

> 5Full diagnostic distributions are provided in Appendix C.
> [B-ARG0: temperament I-ARG0: through I-ARG0: study I-ARG0: and I-ARG0: practice]

Our error analyzer operates over BIO-tagged token sequences and dependency parsers. 6 It identifies adjacent spans assigned the same semantic role as candidate repeated arguments, whose depen-dency structure determines classification. Spans attaching to the same syntactic head are labeled as same_head ; cases involving prepositional modi-fication are categorized as pp_attach ; and spans lying within another’s dependency subtree are clas-sified as subtree_attach (see Table 3). Errors classified into predefined types are marked “Fixable”; otherwise, sentences are flagged “Review Required”, indicating that the error cannot be automatically resolved. Classification outcomes enable structured evaluation of error patterns across systems. We apply dependency-aware error detec-tion to cases where AllenNLP predicts correct tags, but our model does not—accounting for 2.11% of tokens within the 4.8% total disagreement. Over 18,539 such errors, our analyzer identifies 498 to-kens (2.68%) as belonging to fixable categories (same_head , subtree_attach , and pp_attach )that can be automatically resolved. Additionally, 933 tokens (5.03%) involve repeated role spans that cannot be resolved automatically and are therefore flagged as “Review Required” (see Table 4). The dependency-aware analyzer provides a sys-tematic framework for characterizing residual in-consistencies. Leveraging structural signals, it iden-tifies potential mislabeling, flags cases needing hu-man judgment, and improves the structural inter-pretability of SRL predictions. 

6 Representation Behavior of LLMs 

Building on the structured SRL framework, we in-vestigate how LLMs perform SRL when provided explicit syntactic structural. We examine whether externally supplied dependency information influ-ences SRL predictions and how reliably LLMs utilize such signals. To enable controlled analy-sis, we compare LLM outputs with and without dependency-informed context, isolating the inter-action between syntactic structure and generative semantic inference. Experiments are conducted in a zero-shot setting using gpt-oss-120b. To probe LLM SRL behavior under controlled conditions, we adopt an instructional guidance                                   

> 6See Appendix D for the analyzer pipeline. Subtype Definition Example
> same_head Both spans attach to the same syntactic head.
> ✓Ours: [ARG2: just brain dead]
> ✗Allen: [ARG2: just] [ARG2: brain dead]
> ✗Ours: [ARG1: the various revisions] to [ARG1: trade law]
> ✓Allen: [ARG1: the various revisions to trade law]
> pp_attach Right (left) span is a PP modifying the left (right) span.
> ✓Ours: [ARG1: a long section of road]
> ✗Allen: [ARG1: a long section] [ARG1: of road]
> ✗Ours: [ARG1: several kinds] of [ARG1: microbes]
> ✓Allen: [ARG1: several kinds of microbes]
> subtree_attach One span lies inside the dependency subtree of the other span’s head.
> ✓Ours: [ARGM-TMP: for the fourth time on Friday]
> ✗Allen: [ARGM-TMP: for the fourth time] [ARGM-TMP: on Friday]
> ✗Ours: [ARG0: anyone who] finds [ARG0: the pair]
> ✓Allen: [ARG0: anyone who finds the pair]
> Table 3: Error subtypes, definitions, and illustrative examples. All types reflect repeated same arguments within a sentence. These examples are drawn from 4.8% of cases where predictions disagree between AllenNLP and our system. In this example, we present a case in which one of the two systems produces the correct prediction.
> Error bucket Tokens % of 18,539
> NO_BUCKET 17,108 92.28 OTHER_REPEAT 933 5.03 same_head 314 1.67 subtree_attach 141 0.76 pp_attach 43 0.23
> Table 4: Token distribution for cases where AllenNLP is correct on disagreements with our model (18,539 in-stances). Errors in the five structural categories ( same_head ,
> subtree_attach , and pp_attach ) are labeled “Fixable”, while others are flagged as “Review Required,” indicating a need for human intervention.

formulation strategy, 7 providing explicit role def-initions and structural output constraints on the CoNLL-2012 test set. We compare predictions with and without dependency-informed syntactic signals, enabling a controlled analysis of how exter-nal structural signals influences SRL performance. Table 5 shows that dependency-informed prompts improve predictions (F1: 42.17 vs. 44.30). The gains reflect improved span-boundary stability and phrase-level coherence rather than role classi-fication accuracy, indicating more reliable argu-ment grouping. Unlike prior LLM-based SRL approaches requiring retrieval or iterative self-correction (Li et al., 2025), our formulation remains lightweight, relying on structural guidance and de-pendency cues. Qualitative analysis further illustrates these struc-tural effects. Consider Fruit that shows a hint of black through the red color of the skin fetches the best price , where fetches is the predicate. With-out dependency cues, LLMs collapse argument spans, assigning ARG0 only Fruit . With depen-

> 7See Appendix E for the full prompt.

dency information, the model preserves the full phrase ( Fruit that shows a hint of black through the red color of the skin ), indicating improved struc-tural grouping. A second pattern involves duplicate role assign-ments. In to publicly support the project , predic-tions without dependency signals produce frag-mented ARG1 spans [B-ARG1: to I-ARG1: pub-licly] [B-ARG1: support I-ARG1: the I-ARG1: project] . Dependency-informed prompts instead yield a single continuous span, reflecting constraint-consistent phrase composition. These findings indicate that dependency-informed structural signals enhance representation stability rather than classification capacity, high-lighting the interaction between syntactic structure and generative semantic inference. 

7 Multilingual Applicability: A Projection Case Study 

Building on our English benchmark results, we extend the model to multilingual transfer settings. We adopt cross-lingual SRL projection techniques to examine how explicitly represented predicate-argument structures transfer across-languages, aligning English–French sentence pairs via one-to-one token mappings prior to semantic role transfer. Recent work on AllenNLP-based cross-lingual SRL transfer highlights hallucinations arising from structural mismatches between languages (Youm et al., 2024). The approach aligns English-French sentence pairs by first adding or removing tokens to ensure one-to-one mappings prior to semantic role transfer. Adding or removing tokens to ensure one-to-one mappings prior to SRL transfer still Method Struct. Const. RAG Self-Corr. Precision Recall F1 Li et al. (2025) (LLaMA-8B) ✗ ✓ ✓ 6.29 7.59 6.88 Ours (gpt-oss-120b) ✓ ✗ ✗ 46.58 35.58 42.17 Ours (gpt-oss-120b with Dependency-Guided Structure) ✓ ✗ ✗ 49.03 40.44 44.30 

Table 5: Comparison of frozen on SRL performance across inference strategies on the CoNLL 2012 test set. Struct. Const.(Structural Constraints) denotes schema-constrained prompts enforcing BIO tagging rules. 

carry over errors already present in the English SRL outputs. Figure 2 illustrates such a case. When aligning 

after the October 1987 crash with its French coun-terpart après l’écrasement (de) octobre 1987 , de 

is omitted and écrasement is repeated. However, on the English side, after is incorrectly tagged as 

I-ARGM-TMP rather than B-ARGM-TMP , leaving the correction incomplete and propagating the error to the French side.             

> [I-ARGM-TMP] after —après; 7-5 [I-ARGM-TMP] the —l’ ; 8-6 [I-ARGM-TMP] october —écrasement ; 9-7 [I-ARGM-TMP] october —octobre ; 9-9 [I-ARGM-TMP] 1987 —1987 ; 10-10 [I-ARGM-TMP] crash —écrasement ; 11-7

Figure 2: Prior cross-lingual SRL (Youm et al., 2024) re-solves alignment errors before SRL transfer. The English excerpt (tokens 7-11) aligns with the French excerpt (tokens 5-10). English tokens october (9) and crash (11) align to French écrasement (7). The spurious 9-7 alignment is ulti-mately excluded, but after —and correspondingly après —are left incorrectly tagged as I-ARG-TMP .

We address this limitation by replacing the Al-lenNLP SRL component with our structure infer-ence framework, preserving predicate-argument boundaries while eliminating redundant per-predicate processing. This restructuring yields 

≈ 10 × faster projection and enables large-scale multilingual dataset construction. Beyond efficiency, our model improves struc-tural accuracy. In the same example, the dependency-aware detector recognizes after the October 1987 crash as a single noun phrase and la-bels it under pp_attach . It then correctly initiates the span with a B-ARGM-TMP tag on after , rather than the erroneous I-ARGM-TMP label in Figure 3.           

> [B-ARGM-TMP] after —[B-ARGM-TMP] après [I-ARGM-TMP] the —[I-ARGM-TMP] l’ [I-ARGM-TMP] october —[I-ARGM-TMP] octobre [I-ARGM-TMP] 1987 —[I-ARGM-TMP] 1987 [I-ARGM-TMP] crash —[I-ARGM-TMP] écrasement

Figure 3: Dependency-aware correction applied to the Octo-ber 1987 crash example. The revised SRL output correctly marks after with a B-ARGM-TMP tag, restoring the missing boundary and producing a complete span alignment across English and French. 

These findings underscore a broader implication: structurally explicit semantic representations pro-vide stability advantages not only within monolin-gual inference but also during cross-lingual pro-jection, where small boundary deviations can am-plify into large inconsistencies. Leveraging this structure-preserving design, our framework sup-ports structurally faithful SRL projection in down-stream multilingual settings; while illustrated here through an English-French case study, this analy-sis highlights the potential value of structured SRL for multilingual applications that leverage English-centric resources. 

8 Conclusion and Future Work 

This paper revisits structured semantic role labeling (SRL) through a modernized encoder-based frame-work that eliminates redundant per-predicate encod-ing while preserving predictive performance. By caching sentence-level representations, the frame-work achieves a 10 × inference speedup over Al-lenNLP while maintaining comparable accuracy, and supports stronger performance with alternative encoders such as RoBERTa and DeBERTa. We also introduce a dependency-informed diag-nostic methodology for systematically character-izing span boundary inconsistencies. The analy-sis shows that dependency-informed structural sig-nals primarily enhance representational stability in both encoder-based and LLM-based SRL, improv-ing span coherence and argument grouping rather than raw classification accuracy. The framework aligns naturally with cross-lingual SRL projection pipelines, with implications for downstream multi-lingual SRL transfer. Future work includes fine-tuning decoder-only LLMs within this structured formulation, integrat-ing SRL transfer pipelines for multilingual dataset construction, and refining dependency-aware error detection to further reduce regression cases. Limi-tations of the framework and ethical considerations are discussed in Appendices F and G. 8

> 8

See Appendix F for limitations and Appendix G for ethi-cal considerations. Acknowledgement 

This research is based upon work supported, in part, by the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) under Contract No. W912CG-24-C-0014 and, in part, by the National Institute Of Mental Health of the National Institutes of Health under Award Number R01MH135504. The views and conclusions expressed in this paper are those of the authors, who are solely responsible for its content, and do not necessarily represent the offi-cial views, policies, or positions, either expressed or implied, of the National Institutes of Health, DARPA, or the U.S. Government. The U.S. Gov-ernment is authorized to reproduce and distribute reprints for Government purposes notwithstanding any copyright notation hereon. 

References 

Claire Bonial, Julia Bonn, Kathryn Conger, Jena D. Hwang, and Martha Palmer. 2014. PropBank: Se-mantics of new predicate types. In Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC’14) , pages 3013– 3019, Reykjavik, Iceland. European Language Re-sources Association (ELRA). Julia Bonn, Harish Tayyar Madabushi, Jena D. Hwang, and Claire Bonial. 2024. Adjudicating LLMs as Prop-Bank adjudicators. In Proceedings of the Fifth In-ternational Workshop on Designing Meaning Repre-sentations @ LREC-COLING 2024 , pages 112–123, Torino, Italia. ELRA and ICCL. Xavier Carreras and Lluís Màrquez. 2005. Introduction to the conll-2005 shared task: Semantic role labeling. In Proceedings of the Ninth Conference on Compu-tational Natural Language Learning (CoNLL-2005) ,pages 152–164, Ann Arbor, Michigan. Association for Computational Linguistics. Huiyao Chen, Meishan Zhang, Jing Li, Min Zhang, Lilja Øvrelid, Jan Hajiˇ c, and Hao Fei. 2025. Semantic role labeling: A systematical survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.08660 .Simone Conia, Edoardo Barba, Alessandro Scirè, and Roberto Navigli. 2022. Semantic role labeling meets definition modeling: Using natural language to de-scribe predicate-argument structures. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2022 .Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. 2019. BERT: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language under-standing. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-nologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers) , pages 4171–4186, Minneapolis, Minnesota. Association for Computational Linguistics. Jing Fan, Dennis Aumiller, and Michael Gertz. 2023. Evaluating factual consistency of texts with seman-tic role labeling. In Proceedings of the 12th Joint Conference on Lexical and Computational Seman-tics (*SEM 2023) , pages 89–100, Toronto, Canada. Association for Computational Linguistics. Hao Fei, Meishan Zhang, Bobo Li, and Donghong Ji. 2021. End-to-end semantic role labeling with neu-ral transition-based model. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence , volume 35, pages 12803–12811. Nicholas FitzGerald, Oscar Täckström, Kuzman Ganchev, and Dipanjan Das. 2015. Semantic role labeling with neural network factors. In Proceedings of the 2015 Conference on Empirical Methods in Nat-ural Language Processing , pages 960–970, Lisbon, Portugal. Association for Computational Linguistics. Matt Gardner, Joel Grus, Mark Neumann, Oyvind Tafjord, Pradeep Dasigi, Nelson F. Liu, Matthew Pe-ters, Michael Schmitz, and Luke Zettlemoyer. 2018. AllenNLP: A deep semantic natural language pro-cessing platform. In Proceedings of Workshop for NLP Open Source Software (NLP-OSS) , pages 1–6, Melbourne, Australia. Association for Computational Linguistics. Jan Hajiˇ c, Massimiliano Ciaramita, Richard Johans-son, Daisuke Kawahara, M. Antònia Martí, Lluís Màrquez, Adam Meyers, Joakim Nivre, Sebastian Padó, Jan Štˇ epánek, Pavel Straˇ nák, Mihai Surdeanu, Nianwen Xue, and Yi Zhang. 2009. The conll-2009 shared task: Syntactic and semantic dependencies in multiple languages. In Proceedings of the Thir-teenth Conference on Computational Natural Lan-guage Learning: Shared Task , pages 1–18, Boulder, Colorado. Association for Computational Linguis-tics. Luheng He, Kenton Lee, Mike Lewis, and Luke Zettle-moyer. 2017. Deep semantic role labeling: What works and what’s next. In Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 473–483, Vancouver, Canada. Association for Computational Linguistics. Pengcheng He, Xiaodong Liu, Jianfeng Gao, and Weizhu Chen. 2020. Deberta: Decoding-enhanced bert with disentangled attention. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.03654 .Shexia He, Zuchao Li, Hai Zhao, and Hongxiao Bai. 2018. Syntax for semantic role labeling, to be, or not to be. In Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Vol-ume 1: Long Papers) , pages 2061–2071, Melbourne, Australia. Association for Computational Linguistics. Matthew Honnibal and Ines Montani. 2025. spaCy: Industrial-strength natural language processing in python. Ishan Jindal, Alexandre Rademaker, Michał Ulewicz, Linh Ha, Huyen Nguyen, Khoi-Nguyen Tran, Huaiyu Zhu, and Yunyao Li. 2022. Universal proposition bank 2.0. In Proceedings of the 13th Language Re-sources and Evaluation Conference (LREC) , pages 1700–1711, Marseille, France. European Language Resources Association. Daniel Jurafsky and James H. Martin. 2025. Speech and Language Processing: An Introduction to Natu-ral Language Processing, Computational Linguistics, and Speech Recognition with Language Models , 3rd edition. Manfred Klenner and Anne Göhring. 2022. Semantic role labeling for sentiment inference: A case study. In Proceedings of the 18th Conference on Natural Language Processing (KONVENS 2022) , pages 144– 149, Potsdam, Germany. KONVENS 2022 Organiz-ers. Xinxin Li, Huiyao Chen, Chengjun Liu, Jing Li, Meis-han Zhang, Jun Yu, and Min Zhang. 2025. LLMs can also do well! breaking barriers in semantic role labeling via large language models. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2025 , pages 23162–23180, Vienna, Austria. Associa-tion for Computational Linguistics. Zuchao Li, Shexia He, Hai Zhao, Yiqing Zhang, Zhu-osheng Zhang, Xi Zhou, and Xiang Zhou. 2019. De-pendency or span, end-to-end uniform semantic role labeling. AAAI’19/IAAI’19/EAAI’19. AAAI Press. Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Man-dar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy, Mike Lewis, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. 2019. Roberta: A robustly optimized bert pretraining ap-proach. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.11692 .Brodie Mather, Bonnie Dorr, Adam Dalton, William de Beaumont, Owen Rambow, and Sonja Schmer-Galunder. 2022. From stance to concern: Adaptation of propositional analysis to new tasks and domains. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2022 , pages 3354–3367, Dublin, Ireland. Association for Computational Linguistics. Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, Alban Desmaison, Andreas Kopf, Edward Yang, Zachary DeVito, Martin Raison, Alykhan Te-jani, Sasank Chilamkurthy, Benoit Steiner, Lu Fang, and 2 others. 2019. Pytorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep learning library. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 32 , pages 8024–8035. Matthew E. Peters, Mark Neumann, Mohit Iyyer, Matt Gardner, Christopher Clark, Kenton Lee, and Luke Zettlemoyer. 2018. Deep contextualized word repre-sentations. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-nologies, Volume 1 (Long Papers) , pages 2227–2237, New Orleans, Louisiana. Association for Computa-tional Linguistics. Sameer Pradhan, Julia Bonn, Skatje Myers, Kathryn Conger, Tim O’Gorman, James Gung, and Martha Palmer. 2022. Propbank comes of age—larger, smarter, and more diverse. In Proceedings of *SEM (STARSEM) 2022 , pages 278–288. Sameer Pradhan, Alessandro Moschitti, Nianwen Xue, Olga Uryupina, and Yuchen Zhang. 2012. Conll-2012 shared task: Modeling multilingual unrestricted coreference in ontonotes. In Proceedings of the Joint Conference on EMNLP and CoNLL – Shared Task ,pages 1–40, Jeju, Korea. Association for Computa-tional Linguistics. Michael Roth and Mirella Lapata. 2016. Neural seman-tic role labeling with dependency path embeddings. In Proceedings of the 54th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 1192–1202, Berlin, Germany. Association for Computational Linguistics. Peng Shi and Jimmy Lin. 2019. Simple bert models for relation extraction and semantic role labeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.05255 .Tianze Shi and Liang Lin. 2020. Semantic role labeling as syntactic dependency parsing. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics , 8:637– 651. Gabriel Stanovsky, Julian Michael, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Ido Dagan. 2018. Supervised open information extraction. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-nologies, Volume 1 (Long Papers) , pages 885–895, New Orleans, Louisiana. Association for Computa-tional Linguistics. Ralph Weischedel, Martha Palmer, Mitchell Marcus, Eduard Hovy, Sameer Pradhan, Lance Ramshaw, Ni-anwen Xue, Ann Taylor, Peter Kaufmann, Michelle Franchini, Mohammed El-Bachouti, Robert Hous-ton, and Olga Krasny. 2013. Ontonotes release 5.0. LDC2013T19. Han Wu, Haochen Tan, Kun Xu, Shuqi Liu, Lianwei Wu, and Linqi Song. 2022. Zero-shot cross-lingual con-versational semantic role labeling. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: NAACL 2022 , pages 269–281. Sangpil Youm, Brodie Mather, Chathuri Jayaweera, Juliana Prada, and Bonnie Dorr. 2024. Dahrs: Divergence-aware hallucination-remediated srl pro-jection. In International Conference on Applications of Natural Language to Information Systems , pages 423–438. Springer. {’words’: [’Mary’, ’gave’, ’me’, ’a’, ’present’, ’.’], ’predicate_word_idx’: 1, ’labels’: [’B-ARG0’, ’B-V’, ’B-ARG2’, ’B-ARG1’, ’I-ARG1’, ’O’] } 

> Figure 4: Example SRL instance represented as a JSON object, showing tokenized words, the predicate index, and BIO-formatted semantic role labels.

Yu Zhang, Qingrong Xia, Shilin Zhou, Yong Jiang, Guo-hong Fu, and Min Zhang. 2022. Semantic role la-beling as dependency parsing: Exploring latent tree structures inside arguments. In Proceedings of the 29th International Conference on Computational Lin-guistics (COLING) , pages 4212–4227. 

A Dataset Creation 

In CoNLL-2012, each predicate in a sentence yields a separate SRL instance, resulting in multi-ple entries for sentences containing more than one predicate. As shown in Figure 4, each instance is stored as a JSON object containing:       

> •words : the tokenized sentence; •predicate_word_idx : the index of the predicate token; and •BIO-formatted sequence of semantic role tags (e.g.,
> ["B-ARG0", "B-V", "B-ARG2", "B-ARG1", "I-ARG1", "O"] ).

To mirror AllenNLP’s data format, we recon-struct tokenized .gold_skel files from OntoNotes 

.onf files as follows:                 

> •Token extraction: Extract tokens and their indices from each parse tree, removing artifacts such as “ ∗” or “ %.” •Gold skeleton alignment: Align the extracted tokens with corresponding .gold_skel sections, replacing
> [WORD] placeholders with surface tokens. •Semantic role reconstruction: Convert column-based SRL annotations (columns ≥12 in CoNLL format) into BIO tags using a custom parser that handles nested and single-token spans. •JSON object generation: For each predicate, build a JSON object capturing the predicate index, argument role spans ( ARG0 ,ARG1 ,ARG2 , etc.), and the complete BIO label sequence. Sentences with misaligned tokens are logged and excluded.

This preprocessing yields a large, sentence-aligned set of predicate-level instances for fine-tuning and evaluation, fully compatible with prior SRL systems. Each example represents a specific predicate and its arguments. 

B Distribution of Missing Semantic Roles—Our system 

This section summarizes the distribution of missing roles in our system relative to the ground truth. Figure 5 shows the proportions of roles missing from our predictions, while Figure 6 presents the proportions of missing modifiers (ARGMs) from our prediction.      

> Figure 5: Proportion of missing roles or predicates in our system’s predictions compared to OntoNotes 5.0 ground truth.
> Figure 6: Proportion of missing ARGMs in our system’s
> predictions compared to OntoNotes 5.0 ground truth.

C Distribution of Missing Semantic Roles—AllenNLP 

This section summarizes the distribution of missing roles in AllenNLP relative to the ground truth. Fig-ure 7 reports the proportions of roles missing from AllenNLP, while Figure 8 shows the proportions of missing modifiers (ARGMs) from AllenNLP prediction. 

D Error Analyzer Overview 

Figure 9 presents the dependency-aware error anal-ysis pipeline, detailing the sequential steps used to detect adjacent spans, assess semantic role consis-tency, and categorize structural inconsistencies. 

E Example Prompts for LLM Evaluation 

This section presents the prompt used for dependency-informed SRL, shown both with and Figure 7: Proportion of missing roles or predicates in Al-lenNLP’s predictions compared to OntoNotes 5.0 ground truth.    

> Figure 8: Proportion of missing ARGMs in AllenNLP’s
> predictions compared to OntoNotes 5.0 ground truth.
> Figure 9: Overview of the modernized Dependency Aware Error Analyzer.

without dependency information in the LLM. 

F Limitations 

We analyze the errors produced by our SRL mod-els and categorize them using a dependency-aware detector. While the detector identifies systematic split-span patterns, the majority of cases still re-quire human judgment for comprehensive resolu-tion. To mitigate this, we report which errors are automatically solvable according to our rules and which are not safely fixable without review. This yields an actionable map of error types, clarifies the limits of automatic repair, and guides future SRL diagnostics by focusing human effort where it is most impactful. 

G Ethics Statement on Broader Impact 

Our SRL model relies on Transformer backbones trained on OntoNotes, which may encode the do-main, genre, and annotators’ narrow view present in that corpus. As a result, the model can sys-tematically underperform—or “penalize”—certain argument types or constructions that are underrep-resented in OntoNotes, and these errors are not always fixable by automatic post-hoc analysis. To mitigate this, we encourage training and evaluation on broader, contemporary corpora, and we release rules/code to enable independent audits. Through this process, future work aims to narrow gaps rather than overfitting to OntoNotes. Prompt with dependency information for SRL 

sent (MUST NOT change): I want to go home 

Phrase hints (token spans over Words): 

NP0: NP [0:1], head=0, text="I" VP3: VP [2:5], head=3, text="to go home" XCOMP1: XCOMP [2:5], head=3, text="to go home" VP2: VP [0:5], head=1, text="I want to go home" 

Protected phrase IDs (DO NOT split SRL arguments inside these spans): ["XCOMP1"] 

Return SRL in EXACTLY this JSON schema (example): 

{"sent": "", "words": ["..."], "verbs": [ {"verb": "...", "label": ["O","B-ARG0","I-ARG0","B-V"]} ]}

Hard rules: 

(1) words is the list of tokens obtained from the sentence, separated by whitespace (2) For each verb, label length MUST equal len(words). (3) BIO: I-X cannot start a span; it must follow B-X/I-X of the same X. (4) Include ALL predicates. (5) Use phrase hints ONLY as boundary guidance; do NOT create new tokens. (6) Phrase integrity: do NOT split a role into multiple segments inside any protected phrase span. Bad: [ARG1: to] [ARG1: go home] when ’to go home’ is protected. 

Label guide: Core: ARG0 agent; ARG1 patient; ARG2 instrument/benefactive/attribute; ARG3 start/benefactive/attribute; ARG4 end; ARG5 predicate-dependent. 

Modifiers: ARGM-EXT extent; ARGM-LOC location; ARGM-DIR direction; ARGM-NEG negation; ARGM-MOD general-mod; ARGM-ADV adverbial; ARGM-MNR manner; ARGM-PRD secondary-pred; ARGM-REC reciprocal; ARGM-TMP temporal; ARGM-PRP purpose; ARGM-PNC purpose-no-cause; ARGM-CAU cause; ARGM-ADJ adjectival (nouns); ARGM-COM comitative; ARGM-DIS discourse; ARGM-DSP direct-speech; ARGM-GOL goal; ARGM-LVB light-verb (nouns); ARGA secondary-agent; ARGM-PRR predicating-relation. 

Prompt without dependency information for SRL 

sent (MUST NOT change): I want to go home 

Return SRL in EXACTLY this JSON schema (example): 

{"sent": "", "words": ["..."], "verbs": [ {"verb": "...", "label": ["O","B-ARG0","I-ARG0","B-V"]} ]}

Hard rules: 

(1) words is the list of tokens obtained from the sentence, separated by whitespace (2) For each verb, label length MUST equal len(words). (3) BIO: I-X cannot start a span; it must follow B-X/I-X of the same X. (4) Include ALL predicates in the sentence. 

Label guide: Core: ARG0 agent; ARG1 patient; ARG2 instrument/benefactive/attribute; ARG3 start/benefactive/attribute; ARG4 end; ARG5 predicate-dependent. 

Modifiers: ARGM-EXT extent; ARGM-LOC location; ARGM-DIR direction; ARGM-NEG negation; ARGM-MOD general-mod; ARGM-ADV adverbial; ARGM-MNR manner; ARGM-PRD secondary-pred; ARGM-REC reciprocal; ARGM-TMP temporal; ARGM-PRP purpose; ARGM-PNC purpose-no-cause; ARGM-CAU cause; ARGM-ADJ adjectival (nouns); ARGM-COM comitative; ARGM-DIS discourse; ARGM-DSP direct-speech; ARGM-GOL goal; ARGM-LVB light-verb (nouns); ARGA secondary-agent; ARGM-PRR predicating-relation.