Title: Formalizing Kantian Ethics: Formula of the Universal Law Logic (FULL)

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.14254v1

Published Time: Fri, 17 Apr 2026 00:03:41 GMT

Number of Pages: 10

Markdown Content:
# Formalizing Kantian Ethics: Formula of the Universal Law Logic ( FULL )

# Taylor Olson 

Department of Computer Science, University of Iowa taylolson@uiowa.edu 

Abstract 

The field of machine ethics aims to build Artificial Moral Agents (AMAs) to better understand morality and make AI agents safer. To do so, many approaches encode human moral intuition as a set of axioms on actions e.g., do not harm, you must help others. However, this introduces (at least) two limitations for future AMAs. First, it does not consider the agent’s purposes in performing the action. Second, it assumes that we humans can enumerate our moral intuition. This pa-per explores formalizing a moral procedure that alleviates these two limitations. We specifically consider Kantian ethics and present a multi-sorted quantified modal logic we call the 

Formula of the Universal Law Logic (FULL ). The FULL 

formalizes Kant’s first formulation of the categorical impera-tive, the Formula of the Universal Law (FUL), and concepts such as causality and agency. We demonstrate on three cases from Kantian ethics that the FULL can reason to evaluate agents’ actions for certain purposes without built-in moral intuition, given that it has sufficient (non-normative) back-ground knowledge. Therefore, the FULL is a contribution towards more robust and autonomous AMAs, and a more for-mal understanding of Kantian ethics. 

# Introduction 

To better understand morality and make AI agents safer, the field of machine ethics aims to build Artificial Moral Agents (AMAs) . These are AI agents that can reason about concepts such as moral obligation and prohibition, and use this un-derstanding to evaluate the world and guide their own ac-tions. It has been argued that machine ethics must be done top-down rather than purely bottom-up to avoid making the fallacious inference from Is to Ought (Talat et al. 2022; Ol-son 2024). That is, we must provide AI agents with a set of moral axioms and methods for reasoning from them to yield moral norms for concrete situations. But the critical question is then: what are the moral axioms? 

Current approaches encode a set of moral axioms pre/pro-scribing certain actions e.g., do not harm, do not lie, you must help others (Anderson, Anderson, and Armen 2005; Bringsjord et al. 2014; Malle, Scheutz, and Austerweil 2017; Serramia et al. 2018; Olson and Forbus 2023). However, this provides AMAs with only a weak sense of morality. First, the axioms evaluate only actions (action-centric) and not the agent’s purpose in performing the action (agent-centric); thus, for example, they cannot distinguish between reducing pollution out of duty and doing so for public relations. Sec-ond, it assumes that we humans can enumerate our moral intuition a priori, when further judgment is often needed to resolve conflicts and exceptions in future situations i.e., the problem of value alignment. For example, without further intuition built in, it would evaluate a surgeon cutting into their willing patient as impermissible given that it causes harm. Third, given that the AMAs cannot critique the moral axioms, they cannot participate in moral discourse about the actions of such axioms. Because of these limitations, current approaches lack the moral robustness and autonomy neces-sary for Artificial Moral Agents. In this paper we explore Kantian ethics (Ebels-Duggan and Eckert 2011) as an alternative foundation for AMAs. We specifically formalize Kant’s first formulation of the cat-egorical imperative (CI), the Formula of the Universal Law (FUL) , as a moral axiom. The FUL holds that you must “act only in accordance with that maxim through which you can at the same time will that it should become a universal law” 

(Kant and Gregor 1998). The FUL is appealing as it grounds moral evaluation in equality via universalization. The FUL is also agent-centric and is thus capable of evaluating actions and their purposes. Most important for machine ethics, it is also quite formal as it does not pre/proscribe any specific ac-tion. Thus, we do not need to enumerate our moral intuition for it to perform moral evaluation. Therefore, formalizing the FUL will yield more robust and autonomous AMAs. Researchers have recently made progress on formalizing Kant’s second, less formal formulation, the Formula of Hu-manity (Lindner and Bentzen 2018). However, as they state, “the formalization of the first formulation in effect remains an open problem” (with the exception of one recent paper (Singh 2022)). In this paper we make progress on this prob-lem by presenting a quantified multi-sorted quantified modal logic we call the Formula of the Universal Law Logic , or 

FULL . With the FULL we contribute a formalization of the FUL that: 1) Evaluates actions done for certain purposes (agent-centric), rather than only actions (action-centric); 2) Requires less moral intuition to be encoded by humans; 3) Formally demonstrates core concepts of Kantian ethics. We start by providing background on Kantian ethics in Section . Next, in Section we introduce the FULL . We describe its syntax, proof calculus, and the semantics of its theories of action, causality, agency, and moral evaluation. 

> arXiv:2604.14254v1 [cs.AI] 15 Apr 2026

Next, in Section we demonstrate with formal proofs that the 

FULL can reason to produce moral norms. Then, in Sec-tion we illustrate how it formalizes Kant’s ontology of con-tradictions and duties. Lastly, we discuss related and future work. 

# Background 

Immanuel Kant was an 18th century German philosopher whose works spanned many fields such as ethics, epistemol-ogy, and metaphysics. His ethical theory falls under deontol-ogy as it focuses on reasons and principles of action, rather than their external consequences as in consequentialism , or virtuous nature as in virtue ethics .In the Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals (Kant and Gregor 1998), Kant aims to discover the laws that gov-ern the will (practical reason) as laws of logic govern belief (theoretical reason). In other words, he aims to discover our moral axioms. He ends up deriving three different formu-lations of a single axiom called the categorical imperative .The first formulation of the categorical imperative is called the Formula of the Universal Law (FUL) . It is the most for-mal of the three and thus best serves our purposes in machine ethics. This law holds that you ought to: “Act only in accordance with that maxim through which you can at the same time will that it should become a universal law” (Kant and Gregor 1998). An agent’s will is the faculty that deliberates and decides how to act. It is the mind in its practical state (reasoning about what to do), rather than its theoretical state (reasoning about what to believe). A maxim is then an agent’s subjec-tive principle of the will. Maxims take the form, “I will do 

⟨Action ⟩ for ⟨Purpose ⟩.” To clear up a common misconception, by “ can will that your maxim should be become a universal law”, Kant does not mean “want.” The Kantian agent does not determine if they would want other agents to act as they do, as they would do under a Golden Rule. Instead, the agent determines if they 

can , without contradiction , imagine a world in which every-one acts on their maxim. For example, imagine that Karli intends to travel but needs money. Karli is considering making a promise to repay her friend Jan with no intention of returning the money. The FUL commands Karli to imagine a world in which everyone false promises to get money, and to not perform her action if it would be contradictory in this world. This imagined world is often called the World of the Universal Law (WUL) .Philosophers are divided on what is (or should be) meant by “contradiction.” Various interpretations have been of-fered, but they are usually categorized as either logical con-tradiction interpretations (LCI) , teleological (TCI) , or prac-tical (PCI) . The LCI holds that contradictions occur when one cannot logically conceive of their action in the WUL. For example, Karli cannot even conceive of promises in the WUL, as the practice of promising would not exist in a world where everyone false promised. However, the LCI on its own does not handle natural actions such as murder, given that their existence does not depend on any conventions, and thus can still be conceived of in the WUL. Therefore, for natural actions, and various maxims of omission, the LCI must in-troduce a different kind of contradiction. The teleological contradiction interpretation (TCI) in-stead posits that rational agents possess innate purposes and ground contradictions in that which does not align these pur-poses. For example, murder would be wrong because in the WUL it contradicts our natural purpose of happiness. Lastly, the practical contradiction interpretation (PCI), championed by O’Neill (O’Neill 2013) and Korsgaard (Ko-rsgaard 1996), grounds contradictions in effectiveness. Un-der the PCI, the FUL asks the agent to determine if their action would still be an effective means of achieving their purpose in the WUL. If it becomes ineffective, then it is morally impermissible. For example, Karli’s false promise to Jan would be an ineffective means of getting money in the WUL, as Jan would not believe it in a world where everyone who needs money false promises. Importantly, the PCI also handles natural actions. For example, murdering for money would be ineffective in the WUL given that everyone else would just murder you for this money as well. Here we formalize the FUL under a practical contradic-tion interpretation, as it handles notoriously difficult cases (e.g., violent actions) without introducing ad hoc contradic-tion types like the LCI, or positing teleological assumptions like the TCI. Restated under a PCI, the FUL holds that: act-ing on your maxim is permissible if and only if the action of your maxim is an effective means for achieving the pur-pose of your maxim in the world of the universal law . To provide a better moral procedure for Artificial Moral Agents and a formal interpretation of Kantian ethics, we formalize the FUL and necessary concepts of agency in a modal logic. We describe this formalism next. 

# Formalism 

We formalize the FUL in a multi-sorted quantified modal logic we call the Formula of the Universal Law Logic (FULL ). In Figure 1 we define the syntax of FULL in BNF including a system of sorts S, a grammar for terms t, and a grammar for sentences ϕ. We assume a signature for func-tion and predicate symbols of the domain being modeled. The proof calculus for FULL is based on natural deduction (Ja´ skowski 1934) and thus includes all elimination and in-troduction rules for first-order logic and additional rules for modal operators. We list rules for modal operators at the bot-tom of Figure 1. We denote syntactic entailment as ⊢FULL .We describe the components of FULL in the next sec-tions. To help illustrate, we continue with our running ex-ample of false promising. Consider constants karli and jan 

of sort Agent , the function f alseP romise that takes an agent and returns a term representing a F alseP romise 

to that agent (where F alseP romise is a sub-sort of 

P romise and further Action ), and the unary predicate 

HasT ravelM oney on the set of agents. 

karli, jan : Agent f alseP romise : Agent → F alseP romise HasT ravelM oney (⟨Agent ⟩)Syntax 

S ::= Object | Agent | Action t ::= x : S | c : S | f (t1, ..., t n)

ϕ ::= ⊤ | ⊥ | ¬ ϕ | ϕ1 ∧ ϕ2 | ϕ1 ∨ ϕ2 | ϕ1 → ϕ2 | ϕ1 ↔ ϕ2 | ∀ x : S.ϕ | ∃ x : S.ϕ | t1 = t2

Does (⟨Agent ⟩, ⟨Action ⟩) | W ills (⟨Agent ⟩, ϕ ) | F or (ϕ1, ϕ 2) | Causes ([ ¬]Does (⟨Agent ⟩, ⟨Action ⟩), ϕ )

P erm (F or (ϕ1, ϕ 2)) | Imp (F or (ϕ1, ϕ 2)) | Obl (F or (ϕ1, ϕ 2)) 

Rules of Inference 

Causes (ϕ1, ϕ 2)

ϕ1 → ϕ2

[R1] W ills (a, ϕ )

¬W ills (a, ¬ϕ) [R2]

ϕ1 → ϕ2

W ills (a, ϕ 1) → W ills (a, ϕ 2) [R3] ∃ψ ∈ FULL .W ills (a, ϕ ) → ψ [R4]

F or (ϕ1, ϕ 2)

ϕ1 ∧ W ills (α(ϕ1), ϕ 2) [R5] F or (ϕ1, ϕ 2)

Causes (ϕ1, ϕ 2) [R6]

Figure 1: The syntax of the Formula of the Universal Law Logic ( FULL ), specified in Backus–Naur Form, and its rules of inference. We assume a first-order signature for function and predicate symbols of the domain being modeled. [] indicates optional components. 

Actions and Causal Laws 

We formalize an action theory with the first-order predicate 

Does over agents and actions. We assume actions are repre-sented as non-atomic terms. 

Definition 1 (Does/Omits) . Where a : Agent and b :

Action , we represent the doing of b by a with the first-order predicate Does (a, b ). The omission of b by a is then rep-resented as ¬Does (a, b ). These are to be read as “agent a

does/omits action b,” respectively. The accessor functions α and β yield the agent and action terms of a Does statement, respectively. 

For example, karli false promising jan is represented as 

Does (karli, f alseP romise (jan )) . Where ϕ is this Does 

statement, α(ϕ) = karli and β(ϕ) = f alseP romise (jan ).Next, we formalize causal laws with a modal operator 

Causes , as causality is central to moral theory. 

Definition 2 (Causal Law) . Where a : Agent , b : Action ,and ϕ is a formula, causal laws are represented as: 

Causes ([ ¬]Does (a, b ), ϕ ).

This is to be read as “agent a doing/omitting action b causes 

ϕ to be true.” 

For example, false promising to repay money being a cause of having money to travel is represented as the causal law below. 

∀a1, a 2 : Agent.Causes (Does (a1, f alseP romise (a2)) ,HasT ravelM oney (a1)) .

Note that by this definition omissions have causal status, which is still a topic of philosophical debate (Clarke 2012). However, it seems clear that omitting to help a drowning child has moral import. Accepting examples such as this re-quires accepting that omission has causal status. While providing a full semantic account of causality here is out of scope, we do provide a working proof-theoretic def-inition of causality via inference rule R1 that serves our pur-poses of illustrating the FUL. 

R1 : Causes ([ ¬]Does (a, b ), ϕ ) ⊢FULL 

[¬]Does (a, b ) → ϕ

Intuitively, rule R1 holds that if doing/omitting an action causes some state of affairs to be true, then when it is true that you do/omit that action, those state of affairs are also true. We note that this definition is consistent with (though weaker than) contemporary model-theoretic definitions of causality (Halpern 2016), and future work will be adapting such accounts for the FULL .

Willing 

An agent’s will is the faculty that deliberates and decides how to act i.e., the thing that does practical reasoning. It has as its object a purpose, or a state of affairs the agent aims to realize. We formalize this with the modal operator W ills .

Definition 3 (Willing) . Where a : Agent and ϕ is a formula, 

a willing ϕ is represented as: 

W ills (a, ϕ ).

This is to be read as “agent a wills the truth of ϕ.” For example, karli willing to have money to travel is rep-resented as: W ills (karli, HasT ravelM oney (karli )) .The semantics of willing stems from rules R2, R 3, and 

R4. We describe each next. 

Definition 4 (R2: Consistency of the Will) . Willing some-thing entails that you do not will the opposite. 

R2 : W ills (a, ϕ ) ⊢FULL ¬W ills (a, ¬ϕ)

Rule R2 is a consistency axiom common to modal logic (Garson 2016). 

Definition 5 (R3: Monotonicity of the Will) . Willing is closed under entailment i.e., willing a fact entails that you will all that fact entails. 

R3 : ϕ → ψ ⊢FULL W ills (a, ϕ ) → W ills (a, ψ )

Rule R3 is a rule of monotonicity and common to modal logic as well. An agent cannot be committed to achieving some state of affairs, know what facts this entails, and not also be committed to those facts. 

Definition 6 (R4: Necessities of the Will) . The will has nec-essary requirements. 

R4 : ⊢FULL ∃ψ ∈ FULL .W ills (a, ϕ ) → ψ

Rule R4 holds that willing necessitates certain facts. For example, a rational agent must be free, alive, and so on in or-der to will anything at all. We do not provide a complete set here, but we do argue that willing necessitates being alive, formalized as R′ 

> 4

below. 

R′ 

> 4

: ⊢FULL W ills (a, ϕ ) → Alive (a)

Maxims 

A maxim is a principle of practical reasoning. Maxims take the form ⟨ϕ1, ϕ 2⟩, where ϕ1 is the action that will be done or omitted and ϕ2 is the purpose for which ϕ1 is done/omit-ted. 1 We formalize maxims with the modal operator F or , as described below. 

Definition 7 (Maxim) . Where a : Agent , behavior ϕ1 is a (possibly quantified and/or negated) Does statement, pur-pose ϕ2 is a first-order formula, maxims are formalized with the modal operator For, written as: 

F or (ϕ1, ϕ 2).

This is to be read as “I will ϕ1 for (to achieve) ϕ2.” 

For example, karli false promising jan in order to have money to travel would be represented as below. 

F or (Does (karli, f alseP romise (jan )) ,HasT ravelM oney (karli ))      

> 1Philosophers have also often considered a third component C
> as a condition on which ϕ1will be done/omitted for ϕ2(O’Neill 2013). This is consistent with contemporary work in conditional deontic logic (Gabbay et al. 2013). Though we agree that context plays a role in moral reasoning, including it as a component in max-ims introduces issues of tailoring maxims to yield desired permis-sibility judgments (Herman 1993). Future work will be exploring how to safely put contextual information into the maxim.

We capture the meaning of maxims with rule R5 and R6,described below. 

R5 : F or (ϕ1, ϕ 2) ⊢FULL ϕ1 ∧ W ills (α(ϕ1), ϕ 2)

Rule R5 holds that doing/omitting an action for some pur-pose entails that you do/omit that action and you will that purpose. Thus, we relate the modal, purposeful concept of doing/omitting with the first-order, non-purposeful concept of doing/omitting and the concept of willing. 

R6 : F or (ϕ1, ϕ 2) ⊢FULL Causes (ϕ1, ϕ 2)

Rule R6 holds that willing a maxim entails that the action is a cause of the purpose. A rational agent willing an end conceptually contains their willing of the necessary means, and thus willing the corresponding maxim. Therefore, acting on this maxim entails that their action/omission is a means (cause) for the end (purpose), insofar as they are rational. In other words, if you do/omit some action to attain some purpose, then, given that you are a rational agent, you must take this doing/omitting to be a cause of that purpose. 

Universal Laws 

The Formula of the Universal Law takes in maxims and yields moral norms via a universalization step. This step takes as input a specific agent’s maxim, which is of the form: “I will do/omit behavior ϕ1 for purpose ϕ2,” and outputs a universal law holding that ϕ1 is the universal means of achieving ϕ2. That is, everyone with a purpose equivalent to 

ϕ2, does/omits an action equivalent to ϕ1. Again, this hypo-thetical world is often called the World of the Universal Law (WUL) .So, how do we formally determine when universalized be-haviors and purposes are relatively equivalent to their spe-cific counterparts? It can’t be strict equivalence, requiring the same objects used, object acted on, time done, location, and so on. For example, the universal law of karli ’s maxim cannot be that everyone false promises jan specifically, at the same time and location. Instead we must determine some equivalence between the relevant type description of con-cepts in the maxim. For example, not false promising jan 

specifically, but false promising some agent that serves as an equivalent substitution for jan , relative to the agent per-forming the action. Others have pointed out the challenges involved in automating this process (O’Neill 2013; Herman 1993). We provide a working solution as a syntactic quanti-fied variable substitution in definition 8. 

Definition 8 (Universal Law) . Let C(ϕ) denote the set of constant symbols within formula ϕ. Given agent a’s maxim 

M = F or (ϕ1, ϕ 2), the Universal Law of M is created via the transformation U L (M ) given the following structures. 

• An infinite set of variables V partitioned into sets for each respective sort. E.g., V = VObject ∪ VAgent ∪

VAction ;

• A finite set Tϕ2 = {a} ∪ C(ϕ2). E.g., {karli : Agent }.I.e., the agent and all constants within their purpose; 

• A finite set Tϕ1 = C(ϕ1) \ Tϕ2 . E.g., {jan : Agent }.I.e., all constants within the agent’s behavior, excluding the agent and those in the their purpose; • A one-to-one mapping σ : Tϕ1 ∪ Tϕ2 → V , respect-ing sort. E.g., σ = {karli 7 → a1, jan 7 → a2}, where 

a1, a 2 ∈ VAgent ;

• A finite set T ′ 

> ϕ2

= {cσ : c ∈ Tϕ2 }. E.g., {a1 : Agent }.I.e., sorted variables for the agent and each constant within their purpose; 

• A finite set T ′ 

> ϕ1

= {cσ : c ∈ Tϕ1 }. E.g., {a2 : Agent }.I.e., sorted variables for each constant within the agent’s behavior, excluding the agent and those in their purpose. The transformation U L (M ) is then defined as: 

U L (M ) = ⟨univ ⟩W ills (aσ, ϕ ′

> 2

) → ⟨ exist ⟩ϕ′

> 1

,

where: 

• ⟨univ ⟩ = map ∀ onto T ′ 

> ϕ2

. E.g., ∀a1 : Agent ;

• aσ is the variable that a maps to; 

• ϕ′ 

> 2

= ϕ2σ. I.e., ϕ2 with all constants substituted for vari-ables. E.g., ϕ′ 

> 2

= HasT ravelM oney (a1);

• ⟨exist ⟩ = map ∃ onto T ′ 

> ϕ1

. E.g., ∃a2 : Agent ;

• ϕ′ 

> 1

= ϕ1σ. I.e., ϕ1 with all constants substituted for vari-ables. E.g., ϕ′ 

> 1

= Does (a1, f alseP romise (a2)) .

Informally, function U L transforms a maxim to a uni-versal law by universally quantifying the agent doing the willing and all other constants within the purpose (set Tϕ2 ), and existentially quantifying all constants within the behav-ior (set Tϕ1 ). For example, take M to be karli ’s previously listed maxim of false promising to jan . U L (M ) is com-puted via the mapping σ = {karli 7 → a1, jan 7 → a2}:

∀a1 : Agent.W ills (a1, HasT ravelM oney (a1)) →∃a2 : Agent.Does (a1, f alseP romise (a2)) .

In English, this universal law states, “all agents that will to have money to travel, tell false promises to some agent.” 

Moral Norms 

The FUL outputs moral norms evaluating the input max-ims. We formalize moral norms with three modal operators (common in Deontic Logics (McNamara and Putte 2025)): 

P ermissible, Impermissible, Obligatory , abbreviated as 

P erm, Imp, Obl throughout. We point out that because de-ontic operators take maxims as objects, they represent the morality of doing actions for certain reasons . This agent-centric approach differs from previous deontic logics that evaluate only actions. As we have stated, this is an impor-tant step for the field of machine ethics, as AMAs should not only do the right thing, but also for the right reasons. We provide a formal definition of moral norms below. 

Definition 9 (Moral Norm) . Where deontic operator D ∈ {P erm, Imp, Obl }, ϕ1 is a (possibly quantified and/or negated) Does formula, ϕ2 is a first-order formula of 

FULL , a moral norm is of the following form. 

D(F or (ϕ1, ϕ 2)) 

This can be read as “doing/omitting ϕ1 for purpose ϕ2 is permissible/impermissible/obligatory.” 

For example, Karli’s maxim being impermissible would be represented as: 

Imp (F or (Does (karli, f alseP romise (jan )) ,HasT ravelM oney (karli ))) .

We define deontic modalities in relation to each other in standard fashion. 

Imp (F or (ϕ1, ϕ 2)) def 

= ¬P erm (F or (ϕ1, ϕ 2)) 

Obl (F or (ϕ1, ϕ 2)) def 

= Imp (F or (¬ϕ1, ϕ 2)) 

Formula of the Universal Law 

The meaning of deontic operators stems from the Formula of the Universal Law: it is permissible to act on your maxim if and only if its action is an effective means for its purpose in the World of the Universal Law . We formalize the FUL with rule F U L in definition 10. 

Definition 10 (Formula of the Universal Law) . Where Γ is a consistent set of formulae of FULL describing a world, 

a : Agent with maxim M , rule F U L is formalized as below. 

F U L : Γ ⊢FULL P erm (M ) ⇔

Γ, W ills (a, U L (M )) ∧ W ills (a, M ) ⊬F U L ⊥

Default assumption (negation as failure): if a maxim can-not be proven as permissible, then it is not permissible. 

Γ ⊬FULL P erm (M ) ⇒ Γ ⊢FULL ¬P erm (M )

Note that we do not explicitly define the notion of effec-tiveness from the PCI. This is because effectiveness is ac-tually a secondary concept derived from principles of ratio-nal agency (Korsgaard 1996). A maxim becomes ineffective when the causal law from which it is derived becomes false. This is contradictory for the agent because they are acting on their maxim as well, and thus take their action to be a cause of their purpose. In other words, the agent wills that their maxim is both ineffective and effective. This is the un-derlying derivation of the PCI. Our interpretation and formalization of the FUL can be summarized as follows. We assume all agents are rational (formalized with rules for willing). We then formalize the FUL as a negative test consisting of three reasoning steps: 1) The agent wills a world in which the universal law is true: 

W ills (a, U L (M )) ; 2) The agent wills to act on their maxim in that same world: W ills (a, M ); 3) The agent simulates to determine if the previous two steps would result in a con-tradiction: ⊢F U L ⊥. If it does result in a contradiction, then by Modus Tollens (MT) from rule F U L and given our de-fault assumption, acting on maxim M is impermissible. To say otherwise would be to take oneself as an exception, as the only difference between the WUL and one’s own world is the universal law . This is Kant’s central moral axiom, and it is quite powerful. From purely formal principles of rational agency, causality, and background knowledge it can produce moral norms. We demonstrate this in the next section. Demonstration 

In this section we use canonical examples from Kantian ethics to demonstrate how the FULL reasons to moral norms. We focus on critiquing input maxims and thus as-sume the cognitive process that formulates them. We also introduce function and predicate symbols on the fly, but their signature is made clear by example. We start by demonstrat-ing on the case of false promising. 

Example 1: False Promising 

Let Γ be a consistent set of formulae of FULL describing a world. Let karli be our agent of interest and jan be another agent from this world. Consider karli ’s maxim M : “I will make a false promise to repay money to jan in order to get money to travel,” represented below. 

M = F or (Does (karli, f alseP romise (jan )) ,HasT ravelM oney (karli )) 

Acting on maxim M is intuitively impermissible. Com-puting this moral norm in FULL means computing 

Γ ⊢FULL Imp (M ) from rule F U L . To do so, we must as-sume karli possesses common sense and causal knowledge of her world. We formalize three facts necessary for this case below. Assume B1, B 2, B 3 ∈ Γ.

B1: There is another agent that wills travel money. 2

∃a1 : Agent. a1̸ = karli ∧ W ills (a1, HasT ravelM oney (a1)) 

B2: Promising to repay money causes getting money to travel only if the promisee believes said promise. 

∀a1, a 2 : Agent. Causes (Does (a1, promise (a2)) ,HasT ravelM oney (a1)) →

BelievesP romise (a2, promise (a2)) 

B3: Agents believe false promises to repay only if agents in their world do not break their promises to repay. 

∀a2 : Agent. BelievesP romise (a2, promise (a2)) →∀a3, a 4 : Agent. ¬Does (a3, f alseP romise (a4)) 

The universal law of karli ’s maxim U L (M ) is “every-one who wills to have travel money, makes false promises to repay” and is formally represented below. 

U L (M ) = 

∀a1 : Agent.W ills (a1, HasT ravelM oney (a1)) →∃a2 : Agent.Does (a1, f alseP romise (a2)) 

Next, we formally prove in FULL that maxim M is im-permissible in the world described by Γ. Again, this works in three steps: 1) will the universal law U L (M ), 2) will your maxim M , and 3) check for contradiction.    

> 2Though this is a strong assumption, it is justified by an epis-temic lack of karli ’s. karli can never be completely certain that there are not other agents that share her same pursuits.

Theorem 1. Γ ⊢FULL Imp (M )

Proof. As the FUL is a negative test, we pro-ceed with a proof by contradiction and show that 

Γ, W ills (karli, U L (M )) ∧ W ills (karli, M ) ⊢FULL ⊥.We leave notation Γ ⊢FULL implicit in derivations. First, consider karli willing U L (M ) (step 1). By Modus Ponens (MP) from B1 and the definition of U L (M ), we can infer that there exists some agent(s) that false promise to repay another agent: 

∃a1, a 2 : Agent.Does (a1, f alseP romise (a2)) .

Thus, by MP from R3, karli wills a world in which an agent false promises to repay: 

W ills (karli, ∃a1, a 2 : Agent. Does (a1, f alseP romise (a2))) .

Thus, by Modus Tollens (MT) from B3 and MP from from R3 we can infer that karli also wills a world where nobody believes promises: 

W ills (karli, ∀a2 : Agent. 

¬BelievesP romise (a2, promise (a2))) .

Therefore, by MT from B2 and MP from R3, we get that 

karli also wills a world in which promising to repay is not a means for having money to travel: 

W ills (karli, ∀a1, a 2 : Agent. 

¬Causes (Does (a1, promise (a2)) ,HasT ravelM oney (a1))) .

Substituting karli for a1, jan for a2, and the sub-sort 

F alseP romise for P romise , by Universal Elimination we know that karli wills that her own false promise is not a means for her end of having money to travel: 

W ills (karli, 

¬Causes (Does (karli, f alseP romise (jan )) ,HasT ravelM oney (karli ))) .

By R2 and Negation Elimination we can then get that 

karli does not will this causal law: 

¬W ills (karli, Causes (Does (karli, f alseP romise (jan )) ,HasT ravelM oney (karli ))) .

Now consider karli willing to act on her maxim in the WUL (step 2): W ills (karli, M ). By MP from R6 we know that insofar as karli is rational, her action must be a cause of her purpose. Thus, by MP from R3 we know that in willing to act on her maxim, karli also wills the causal law: 

W ills (karli, Causes (Does (karli, f alseP romise (jan )) ,HasT ravelM oney (karli )))) .

Thus, we have produced our contradiction. 

Γ, W ills (Karli, U L (M )) ∧ W ills (Karli, M ) ⊢F U L ⊥Therefore, by MT from rule F U L and given our default assumption we get: 

Γ ⊢FULL ¬P erm (M ).

Finally, by definition we get: 

Γ ⊢FULL Imp (M ).Karli , in willing a world in which everyone false promises to repay in order to get travel money, has willed a world where such false promises are an ineffective means of getting said money. In also willing to act on her maxim in this world, she has willed that such false promises are an effective means of getting said money. Thus, this world is contradictory, and therefore acting on her maxim in her own world is morally impermissible. Next, we consider a maxim of murder (inspired by (Ko-rsgaard 1996)). As we described in Section , under a logi-cal contradiction interpretation the FUL struggles with such natural actions as they do not become inconceivable in the WUL. However, we illustrate via the FULL how a practi-cal contradiction interpretation elegantly handles natural ac-tions. 

Example 2: Murder 

Let Γ be a consistent set of formulae of FULL describing a world. Let karli be our agent of interest from this world. Consider karli ’s maxim M : “I will murder the other job candidate in order to be hired over them and securely possess this job.” Where j : Job is the job and jan is the other candidate, maxim M is formalized below. 

M = F or (Does (karli, murder (jan )) ,HiredOver (karli, j, jan )∧

SecurelyP oss (karli, j )) 

Acting on maxim M is clearly impermissible. Comput-ing this moral norm in FULL again requires knowledge of common sense and causal facts of the world. We formal-ize two facts necessary for this case below. Assume B1 and 

B2 ∈ Γ.

B1: Murdering other job candidates is a cause of being hired over them and securely possessing the job only if there is not another agent murdering you. 

∀a1, a 2 : Agent.j 1 : Job.Causes (Does (a1, murder (a2)) ,HiredOver (a1, j 1, a 2)∧

SecurelyP oss (a1, j 1)) 

→ ∄a3Does (a3, murder (a1)) 

B2: There is another agent that wills to be hired over 

karli to securely possess job j.3

∃ax : Agent.a x̸ = karli ∧

W ills (ax, HiredOver (ax, j, karli )∧

SecurelyP oss (ax, j ))       

> 3This is another strong assumption that is justified by the fact that karli can never be completely certain that there are no other agents pursuing her same jobs. In fact, karli can be quite certain that jan wills to be hired over her.

The corresponding universal law of karli ’s maxim M is “for all agents, if there is another candidate that they will to have a secure job over, then they murder them.” 

U L (M ) = ∀a1 : Agent.a 2.Agent.j 1 : Job. W ills (a1, HiredOver (a1, j 1, a 2)∧

SecurelyP oss (a1, j 1)) 

→ Does (a1, murder (a2)) 

Next we formally prove in FULL that karli ’s maxim M

is impermissible. 

Theorem 2. Γ ⊢FULL Imp (M )

Proof. We again proceed with a proof by contra-diction and show that Γ, W ills (karli, U L (M )) ∧

W ills (karli, M ) ⊢FULL ⊥.By MP from B2 and U L (M ) we know that ax murders 

karli (or karli cannot be certain that this will not happen). 

Does (ax, murder (karli )) 

Given that karli will be murdered, by MT from B1 we know that karli ’s murdering of other job candidates is not a cause of her being hired over these candidates to securely possess the job: 

∀a2 : Agent. ¬Causes (Does (karli, murder (a2)) ,HiredOver (karli, j, a 2)∧

SecurelyP oss (karli, j )) .

Thus, by MP from R3 and this fact and substituting jan 

for a2, by Universal Elimination we know that karli has willed a world where her murdering of jan does not cause her to be hired for and secure in job j:

W ills (karli, ¬Causes (Does (karli, murder (jan )) ,HiredOver (karli, j, jan )∧

SecurelyP oss (karli, j ))) .

Therefore, by MP from rule R3 and R2 and Negation Elimination we know: 

¬W ills (karli, Causes (Does (karli, murder (jan )) ,HiredOver (karli, j, jan )∧

SecurelyP oss (karli, j ))) .

Now consider karli ’s willing of maxim M . By MP from rules R3 and R5 we get that karli wills that her action is acause of her purpose: 

W ills (karli, Causes (Does (karli, murder (jan )) ,HiredOver (karli, j, jan )∧

SecurelyP oss (karli, j ))) .

Therefore, we have reached a contradiction and given our two assumptions of karli willing her own maxim and its universalization we know the following. 

Γ, W ills (Karli, U L (M )) ∧ W ills (Karli, M ) ⊢F U L ⊥

Finally, by MT from rule F U L and given our default as-sumption, by definition we get: 

Γ ⊢FULL ¬P erm (M ) def 

= Imp (M ).karli , in willing a world in which everyone murders other job candidates in order to secure a job, and willing to act on such a maxim herself in this world, wills a world where such murdering is and is not an effective means of securing the job. Thus, this world is contradictory, and therefore acting on her maxim is morally impermissible. To illustrate the importance of the FULL being an agent-centric theory, let us say karli murdered jan by cutting her with a knife and contrast this with a case in which karli is a surgeon cutting into her wiling patient jan for a life-saving surgery. Even given the same harmful action, the FULL 

would evaluate it differently given this change of purpose. In this case, cutting a willing patient is still a successful means of saving their life in the World of the Universal Law. That is, this maxim would not produce a contradiction in the WUL. Therefore, by rule F U L , surgeon karli ’s maxim would now be evaluated as permissible. By contrast, current approaches would would either evaluate surgery as imper-missible, or require humans to encode further moral intuition in the axioms noting surgery as an exception to harm. Next, we consider the maxim of omitting aid to others. As we described in Section , the FUL struggles in such cases of omission without introducing different types of contra-dictions or making teleological assumptions. However, we again illustrate with the FULL how the FUL handles these cases under a practical contradiction interpretation. 

Example 3: Never helping others 

Let Γ be a consistent set of formulae of FULL describing a world. Let karli be our agent of interest. Consider karli ’s maxim M : “I will not help others in order to have time for leisure,” represented below. 

M = F or (∀ax : Agent. ¬Does (karli, help (ax)) ,LeisureT ime (karli )) 

Acting on maxim M is intuitively impermissible. We for-malize two background facts necessary for this case below. Assume B1, B 2 ∈ Γ.

B1: All agents will time for leisure. 

∀a1 : Agent.W ills (a1, LeisureT ime (a1)) 

B2: The life of all rational agents requires that some other agent helps them. 4

∀a1 : Agent.Alive (a1) →∃a2 : Agent.a 2̸ = a1 ∧ Does (a2, help (a1)) 

The corresponding universal law of karli ’s maxim M is, “everyone that wills leisure time does not help others,” for-mally represented below. 

∀a1, a 3 : Agent.W ills (a1, LeisureT ime (a1)) →¬Does (a1, help (a3)) 

Next we formally prove in FULL that maxim M is im-permissible in the world described by Γ.

> 4We are finite creatures, and thus cannot do everything by our-selves. We need someone to feed and care for us as infants. We need doctors when we are sick. We require such aid at some times and places, but not universally.

Theorem 3. Γ ⊢FULL Imp (M )

Proof. We again proceed with a proof by contradiction and show: Γ, W ills (karli, U L (M )) ∧W ills (karli, M ) ⊢FULL 

⊥.By MP from R3 given U L (M ) and B1, we get: 

W ills (karli, ∀a1, a 3 : Agent. 

¬Does (a1, action (a1, help (a3)))) .

Therefore, by Universal Elimination substituting karli 

for a3 and re-representing as a negated existential, we can infer that karli wills a world where no agent helps her. 

W ills (karli, 

∄a1 : Agent.Does (a1, action (a1, Help (karli )))) 

By MT from this fact and B2 and MP from R3 we know that Karli has willed a world in which she is not alive: 

W ills (karli, ¬Alive (karli )) .

By MP from R3 and R2 and Negation Elimination we get: 

¬W ills (karli, Alive (karli )) .

However, by R′

> 4

, karli ’s willing of her maxim (really, the willing of anything) necessitates certain facts, specifi-cally that karli is alive. Therefore, by MP from R3, R′

> 4

, and 

W ills (karli, M ) we get: 

W ills (karli, Alive (karli )) .

We now have our contradiction. 

Γ, W ills (Karli, U L (M )) ∧ W ills (Karli, M ) ⊢F U L ⊥

Therefore, by MT from rule F U L and given our default assumption, willing such a maxim in karli ’s own world Γ is impermissible: 

Γ ⊢FULL ¬P erm (M ) def 

= Imp (M ).karli , in willing her maxim of not helping others for leisure time and willing this as a universal law, wills that she is alive and that she is not alive. Thus, never helping others is no longer an effective means of having time for leisure in this world, as she is not alive to will time for leisure. There-fore, acting on her maxim is morally impermissible. A corollary of obligation follows. 

Corollary 3.1. karli must help some agent(s). 

Γ ⊢FULL Obl (F or (∃ax : Agent.Does (karli, help (ax)) ,LeisureT ime (karli ))) 

Proof. By Theorem 3 we know: 

Imp (F or (∀ax : Agent. ¬Does (karli, help (ax)) ,LeisureT ime (karli ))) .

We know: Obl (F or (ϕ1, ϕ 2)) def 

= Imp (F or (¬ϕ1, ϕ 2)) .Thus, we know: 

Obl (F or (¬(∀ax : Agent. ¬Does (karli, help (ax))) ,LeisureT ime (karli ))) 

≡ Obl (F or (∃ax : Agent.Does (karli, help (ax)) ,LeisureT ime (karli ))) .

Therefore, karli must help some agent(s). Types of Contradictions and Duties 

We have demonstrated how the FULL derives moral norms by deriving contradictions given a theory of causality and rational agency. Note that the contradictions produced in the cases of false promising (example ) and murder (example ) differ in form from that of omitting help (example ). In the former cases, the contradictions involved the purpose within the maxim (has travel money and being hired over). In Kan-tian ethics, such contradictions are termed contradictions in conception (CC) 5, which yield perfect (or narrow) duties , as they command exactly what action to do/omit ( karli must not false promise nor murder). However, in the case of omitting help we derived a con-tradiction involving a necessary purpose of the will (being alive). In Kantian ethics, these are termed contradictions in the will (CW) , which yield imperfect (or wide) duties , as they command only to sometimes, and to some extent, do/omit some action ( karli must help someone at some point). Thus, the FULL can sort types of contradictions and duties as well. We formalize this below. 

Definition 11 (Contradiction in Conception) . Given agent a

in a world described by Γ with maxim M = F or (ϕ1, ϕ 2), a contradiction in conception occurs when: 

Γ, W ills (a, M ) ∧ W ills (a, U L (M )) ⊢FULL 

W ills (a, Causes (ϕ1, ϕ 2)) ∧

W ills (a, ¬Causes (ϕ1, ϕ 2)) .

Contradictions in conception yield perfect duties to not ϕ1

to the fullest extent possible, given purpose ϕ2.

Definition 12 (Contradiction in the Will) . Given agent a in a world described by Γ with maxim M = F or (ϕ1, ϕ 2), and 

ψ is a fact necessary to willing: W ills (a, ϕ ) ⊢FULL ψ, a contradiction in the will occurs when: 

Γ, W ills (a, U L (M )) ∧ W ills (a, M ) ⊢FULL 

W ills (a, ψ ) ∧ W ills (a, ¬ψ).

Contradictions in the will yield imperfect duties that com-mand the agent to adopt the necessary end ψ, and therefore to sometimes, and to some extent, not ϕ1, given purpose ϕ2.

# Related Work 

Early work by (Kroy 1976) provides partial formalizations of Kant’s first and second formulations utilizing Hintikka’s possible-world semantics (Hintikka 1969). They present a universalization technique similar to the one we present here. However, they formalize a more trivial Golden Rule: “Don’t do to others what you don’t want done to yourself.” In more recent work, (Lindner and Bentzen 2018) formal-ize Kant’s second formulation. They utilize causal-agency models (Halpern 2016), which we plan to explore in future work. However, because Kant’s second formulation is less formal than his first, they end up grounding moral evalua-tion in an informal and subjective notion of affect. 

> 5We note that philosophers have disagreed on this for violent actions such as murder. See (Herman 1993) for an argument that this is instead a contradiction in the will.

Most related to our work here is (Singh 2022), which presents a formalization of Kant’s first formulation under a PCI. They utilize dyadic deontic logic (Carmo and Jones 2013) and test their theory in the interactive theorem prover Isabelle (Wenzel, Paulson, and Nipkow 2008). Our work ex-pands on theirs by formalizing the notion of effectiveness from the PCI in a way that better captures its derivation. We fully express the causal nature of effectiveness with defeasi-ble causal laws and reason to contradictions based on formal principles of the will. Our formalism also distinguishes be-tween contradictions in conception and contradictions in the will and can thus sort perfect and imperfect duties. 

# Discussion and Future Work 

Here we focus on the form of the arguments made from the FUL and have thus presented the FULL in a proof-theoretic fashion. However, we plan to explore a model-theoretic account of intensional concepts (e.g., intentional actions (Friedenberg and Halpern 2025)) in future work. We also plan to expand the expressiveness of the FULL . As has been noted in the literature (Powers 2006), concepts such as promising survive occasional defeats that cannot be formal-ized with standard quantifiers ∀ and ∃. Thus, future work will require building in generalized quantifiers that model concepts like few and most (Westerst˚ ahl 2024). Lastly, we have assumed the process of formulating max-ims. This is a sincere limitation because it further assumes that input maxims are properly specified. The tragedy of Oedipus has instead shown us that action descriptions matter for evaluation. For example, if we instead described karli ’s murdering of jan as “ karli destroys a collection of cells”, which is a true but not properly specific description, then her maxim may be deemed permissible. Philosophers have argued that pinning down these descriptions likely still re-quires moral intuition and judgment (Herman 1993; O’Neill 2013). Thus, though the FULL reduces the need for human moral intuition to be encoded in AMAs, it may not fully remove it. Both Herman and O’Neill presented possible so-lutions that we plan to explore. 

# Conclusion 

This paper presents the Formula of the Universal Law 

Logic ( FULL ). The FULL is a multi-sorted quantified modal logic that formalizes Kant’s first formulation of the categorical imperative, the Formula of the Universal Law (FUL), and concepts related to rational agency and causal-ity. Through formal proofs on canonical examples in Kan-tian ethics we have demonstrated that the FUL serves as a better foundation for automated moral reasoning. First, it does not simply evaluate actions/omissions, but also agents’ purposes. Second, it does not require humans to enumerate, a priori, our moral intuition as a set of moral axioms. Nor does it require agents to make the fallacious inference from the judgments of a population to moral norms. Instead, the 

FULL reasons top-down from formal, non-normative prin-ciples to moral norms. Therefore, this paper contributes to-wards a more formal understanding of Kantian ethics and improving the robustness of future Artificial Moral Agents. Acknowledgments 

We thank Kyla Ebels-Duggan for thoughtful discussions on Kantian ethics over the years that helped shape ideas in this work (though these views are not necessarily shared by her). 

# References 

Anderson, M.; Anderson, S. L.; and Armen, C. 2005. MedE-thEx: Toward a Medical Ethics Advisor. In AAAI Fall Sym-posium: Caring Machines , 9–16. Bringsjord, S.; Govindarajulu, N. S.; Ellis, S.; McCarty, E.; and Licato, J. 2014. Nuclear deterrence and the logic of deliberative mindreading. Cognitive Systems Research , 28: 20–43. Carmo, J. M.; and Jones, A. J. 2013. Completeness and de-cidability results for a logic of contrary-to-duty conditionals. 

Journal of Logic and Computation , 23(3): 585–626. Clarke, R. 2012. What is an omission? Philosophical Issues ,22: 127–143. Ebels-Duggan, K.; and Eckert, B. 2011. Kantian ethics. The Bloomsbury Handbook to Ethics .Friedenberg, M.; and Halpern, J. 2025. Intents in actions. In 

Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on Artifi-cial Intelligence and Law .Gabbay, D.; Horty, J.; Parent, X.; Van der Meyden, R.; van der Torre, L.; et al. 2013. Handbook of deontic logic and normative systems. Garson, J. 2016. Modal Logic. In Zalta, E., ed., The Stanford encyclopedia of philosophy (spring 2016 edition) .Https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2016/entries/logic-modal/. Halpern, J. Y. 2016. Actual causality . MiT Press. Herman, B. 1993. The practice of moral judgment . Harvard University Press. Hintikka, J. 1969. Deontic logic and its philosophical morals. In Models for modalities: Selected essays , 184–214. Springer. Ja´ skowski, S. 1934. On the rules of suppositions in formal logic. Kant, I.; and Gregor, M. 1998. Immanuel Kant: Groundwork of the metaphysics of morals. Korsgaard, C. M. 1996. Creating the kingdom of ends . Cam-bridge University Press. Kroy, M. 1976. A Partial Formalization of Kant’s Categori-cal Imperative. An Application of Deontic Logic to Classical Moral Philosophy. Kant-Studien , 67(2): 192. Lindner, F.; and Bentzen, M. M. 2018. A formalization of Kant’s second formulation of the categorical impera-tive. In Broersen, J.; Condoravdi, C.; and Nair, S., eds., 

Deontic Logic and Normative Systems. 14th International Conference, DEON. , 211–225. College Publications. ISBN 9781848902787. Malle, B. F.; Scheutz, M.; and Austerweil, J. L. 2017. Net-works of social and moral norms in human and robot agents. In A world with robots: International Conference on Robot Ethics: ICRE 2015 , 3–17. Springer. McNamara, P.; and Putte, F. V. D. 2025. Deontic Logic. In Zalta, E.; and Nodelman, U., eds., The Stan-ford encyclopedia of philosophy (Winter 2025 Edition) .Https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/logic-deontic/. Olson, T. 2024. Chapter Five - Towards unifying the descrip-tive and prescriptive for machine ethics. In Wu, P.; Salpukas, M.; Wu, H.-F.; and Ellsworth, S., eds., Trolley Crash , 69–88. Academic Press. ISBN 978-0-443-15991-6. Olson, T.; and Forbus, K. D. 2023. Mitigating adversar-ial norm training with moral axioms. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , volume 37, 11882–11889. O’Neill, O. 2013. Acting on principle: An essay on Kantian ethics . Cambridge University Press. Powers, T. M. 2006. Prospects for a Kantian machine. IEEE Intelligent Systems , 21(4): 46–51. Serramia, M.; L´ opez-S´ anchez, M.; Rodr´ ıguez-Aguilar, J. A.; Morales, J.; Wooldridge, M.; and Ansotegui, C. 2018. Ex-ploiting moral values to choose the right norms. In Proceed-ings of the 2018 AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society , 264–270. Singh, L. 2022. Automated Kantian ethics: A faithful imple-mentation. In German Conference on Artificial Intelligence (K¨ unstliche Intelligenz) , 187–208. Springer. Talat, Z.; Blix, H.; Valvoda, J.; Ganesh, M. I.; Cotterell, R.; and Williams, A. 2022. On the machine learning of ethical judgments from natural language. In 2022 Annual Confer-ence of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics , 769–779. Association for Com-putational Linguistics. Wenzel, M.; Paulson, L. C.; and Nipkow, T. 2008. The is-abelle framework. In International Conference on Theorem Proving in Higher Order Logics , 33–38. Springer. Westerst˚ ahl, D. 2024. Generalized Quantifiers. In Zalta, E.; and Nodelman, U., eds., The Stanford encyclopedia of philosophy (Fall 2024 Edition) .Https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/generalized-quantifiers/.