Title: The TEA Nets framework combines AI and cognitive network science to model targets, events and actors in text

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.27673v1

Published Time: Fri, 01 May 2026 00:56:01 GMT

Number of Pages: 38

Markdown Content:
# The TEA Nets framework combines AI and cognitive network science to model targets, events and actors in text 

# Sebastiano Franchini 1* †, Alexis Carrillo 1* †, Edoardo Sebastiano De Duro 1* †,Riccardo Improta 1* , Ali Aghazadeh Ardebili 1* and Massimo Stella 1,** 

> 1*

CogNosco Lab, Department of Psychology and Cognitive Science, University of Trento, Rovereto, Trento, Italy. 

> *

Corresponding author: massimo.stella-1@unitn.it. 

> †

These authors contributed equally to this work. 

Abstract 

We introduce Target-Event-Agent Networks (TEA Nets) as a computational framework to extract sub-jects (“Agents”), verbs (“Events”), and objects (“Targets”) from texts. Grounded in cognitive network science and artificial intelligence, TEA Nets are implemented as an open-source Python library. We test TEA Nets in three case studies, demonstrating the framework’s ability to perform interpretable emotion detection, semantic frame analyses, and linguistic inquiries across conspiracy texts and textual responses generated by LLMs. In the LOCO conspiracy corpus, TEA Nets revealed that highly conspiratorial narra-tives (4,227 texts) linked personal pronouns (“I”, “you”, “we”) with the same actions twice as frequently as low-similarity conspiracy narratives. High-conspiracy narratives connected person-focused elements (“you”, “people”) through actions eliciting anger above the random baseline ( z = 2 .63 , p < . 05 ), a trend absent in low-similarity conspiracy narratives, which emphasized scientific actors (“researcher”, “scien-tist”). In the HOPE and CounseLLMe datasets of 212 (human) and 200 (LLM-based) psychotherapy transcripts, respectively, TEA Nets highlighted emotional differences. When expressing feelings, Claude 3 Haiku, GPT-3.5, and humans used sad words with higher frequency than random expectations but Haiku expressed sadness with lower emotional intensity than humans ( U = 1243 .5, p = .036 ). We dis-cuss these differences in the context of psychotherapy training on LLM-simulated patients. Our results show that Target-Event-Agent Networks can extract relevant emotional, syntactic, and semantic insights from narratives, opening new avenues for text analysis with cognitive network science. 

Keywords: cognitive networks, cognitive science, natural language processing. 

# 1 Introduction 

Cognitive psychology defines the mental lexicon as a complex dynamical system that acquires, stores, and processes cognitive representations of linguistic concepts (Haim & Stella, 2026; Harnad, 2017; Hills & Kenett, 2022). Empirical research over the past five decades demonstrates that the mental lexicon operates through 1

> arXiv:2604.27673v1 [cs.AI] 30 Apr 2026

associations between concepts (Aitchison, 2012; D´ oczi, 2019). Concepts in the mental lexicon are accessed via various associative links, including semantic, syntactic, phonological, orthographic, and emotional associa-tions. The structure of these associations significantly influences cognitive processing, memory, and retrieval efficiency (D´ oczi, 2019; Harnad, 2017; Vitevitch, 2022). For instance, the number and diversity of associations connected to a concept directly impact its memorability and retrieval ease (Vitevitch, 2022). Cognitive net-works can span multiple dimensions, including semantic, phonological, syntactic, and emotional associations (Aeschbach, Mata, & Wulff, 2025; Semeraro et al., 2025). To capture this complexity, multilayer cognitive networks offer a way to simultaneously represent these multiple associative dimensions across concepts (Stella et al., 2024). In a multilayer cognitive network, a concept could be replicated as multiple nodes, one per layer, and linked differently on each and layer. In this way, one concept (e.g., “love”) could be linked with its synonyms on a semantic layer (e.g., with “passion” or “affection”) and with other words sounding similar to it on a phonological layer (e.g., with “dove” or “glove”) at the same time. Layers could also be created without replicating nodes, but rather by clustering together nodes of a given type (Hills, 2024). This clus-tering can lead to n-partite networks, i.e., complex networks where nodes are clustered in n groups and links connect only nodes of any two different groups (Newman, 2018). Using multiple layers and/or partitions can be crucial for highlighting key structural features of the mental lexicon. For instance, one could partition a cognitive network into several groups, such as verbs, nouns and other parts of speech, and then check their connectivity properties across semantic or syntactic relationships. Before expanding on this research direc-tion, which is key for our Target-Event-Agent Networks framework, let us discuss the dimension of syntactic relationships in cognitive network science. Traditional cognitive networks often rely on word co-occurrence to extract syntactic relationships between concepts (represented as words) in texts (Aitchison, 2012; Haim & Stella, 2026). However, co-occurrence methods can capture spurious associations and may miss meaningful syntactic relationships (Aitchison, 2012; Stella, 2020; Teixeira, Talaga, Swanson, & Stella, 2021). For example, in the sentence “today I feel so much very - well, you know — sick!”, the syntactic relationship between “I” and “sick” would remain undetected by simple co-occurrence methods due to their textual distance. This limitation has motivated cognitive network science to adopt textual forma mentis networks (TFMNs; (Stella, 2022)). TFMNs are cognitive networks constructed from textual data that explicitly identify syntactic relationships within sentences, capturing deeper associative structures (Semeraro et al., 2025; Stella, 2020, 2022). This process relies on syntactic parsing by artificial intelligence (AI) models that identify relationships such as subject–verb, verb–object, and noun–adjective structures, representing these connections as edges between concept nodes. Additionally, semantic and emotional properties can enrich TFMNs, creating a rich, multidimensional representation of associative knowledge (Semeraro, Vilella, Ruffo, & Stella, 2022; Stella, 2022). This framework has been applied in several domains, including psychopathology in interviews with young adolescents (Carrillo et al., 2025), creativity in short texts (Haim, Fischer, Citraro, Rossetti, & Stella, 2026), and simulated LLM dialogues (De Duro, Improta, & Stella, 2024). Despite their versatility, TFMNs still leave the precise grammatical roles of concepts underspecified, making it hard, for example, to tell who is doing what to whom. Such a gap limits the possibility to reconstruct how people frame actors, actions and consequences in large-scale text analysis. For example, TFMNs do not explicitly distinguish bystanders and perpetrators of sexual assault in online rape narratives (Abramski, Ciringione, Rossetti, & Stella, 2024). In other words, two different roles expressed with the same concept would be represented as a single node in textual forma mentis networks, leading to ambiguity in reconstructing which syntactic relationships were attributed to a given role. For instance, the sentences “I was raped by my brother” or “I was raped, while my brother watched and did nothing” would both feature “brother” as a node in their TFMNs. However, in one case “brother” would occupy the role of perpetrator while in the other case “brother” would fit the role of a bystander. Given the different psychological perceptions that can be attributed to perpetrators and bystanders in sexual assault narratives (Abramski et al., 2024; Labhardt 2et al., 2025), it is important to have novel network science tools capable of distinguishing among actors, actions, consequences and, overall, framings. To fill this research gap, the current study introduces a novel cognitive network model: Target-Event-Agent Networks (TEA Nets). This framework explicitly maps cognitive associations into structures composed of subjects (“Agents”), verbs (“Events”) and objects (“Targets”). By capturing relational and causal dynam-ics, the TEA Nets framework extends traditional associative representations, providing deeper insights into cognitive structures underlying narratives. 

# 1.1 Natural Language Processing approaches to syntactic relation extraction 

Traditional Natural Language Processing (NLP) approaches do not explicitly and transparently detect syn-tactic relations from texts. Dictionary-based approaches, including psychological lexicons (i.e., word lists systematically organized around psychological categories such as emotions, cognition, and social processes) or sentiment lexicons (Hutto & Gilbert, 2014), while highly informative and transparent, fail to capture cru-cial relational information present in language (Feuerriegel et al., 2025). For example, the Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count (Boyd, Ashokkumar, Seraj, & Pennebaker, 2022a, 2022b; Pennebaker, Francis, & Booth, 2001) is a psychologically informed tool that counts meaningful features of texts by simply tracking word appearance, without taking into account who did what and to whom. Similarly, Bag-of-Words (BoW) models reduce texts to unordered collections of words, hence suffering from semantic information loss (Feuerriegel et al., 2025). Although losing contextual information in a docu-ment might not always be an issue (e.g., when counting word frequency), these models are severely limited for tasks requiring deeper understanding, such as detecting cause-and-effect relationships (Feder et al., 2022) or analysing emotional framing related to different characters in different narratives (Abramski et al., 2024). More recent distributional models, including BERT-based models (Devlin, Chang, Lee, & Toutanova, 2019) and Large Language Models (LLMs), encode words and sentences in high-dimensional vector spaces (Binz & Schulz, 2023; Mikolov, Chen, Corrado, & Dean, 2013). Through fine-tuning, these models can acquire a degree of understanding regarding agents, actions, and consequences within language (H. Li et al., 2023), forming an internal representation of contextual information. However, the mechanisms underlying these representations often remain opaque, making such models function as black boxes (Feuerriegel et al., 2025; Rahwan et al., 2019; Rudin, 2019). Unlike black-box models, Subject-Verb-Object extraction approaches provide transparent, “glass-box” access to text analysis, facilitating the reconstruction of networks of actors, actions and consequences as mentioned in narratives. This network approach can merge an NLP pipeline that identifies subjects, verbs, and objects with the complexity science perspective of cognitive networks (Siew, Wulff, Beckage, & Kenett, 2019; Stella, 2020, 2022; Stella et al., 2024; Teixeira et al., 2021). 

# 1.2 Subject-Verb-Object extraction in NLP 

Subject-Verb-Object (SVO) extraction is a Natural Language Processing (NLP) task involving the identi-fication of core grammatical components of a sentence: the subject (action performer), the verb (action), and the object (entity affected by the action) (Sheikh, Haider, & Levis, 2023; Teixeira et al., 2021). Its goal is to explicitly and transparently represent fundamental relational information within text, clarifying “who did what to whom”, something that dictionary-based and BoW approaches do not explicitly represent, and that transformer models may infer only through less transparent internal representations or task-specific prompting/fine-tuning. In this context, SVO extraction is a specialized form of relation extraction, i.e., a machine learning task focused on identifying semantic relationships between entities (Detroja, Bhensdadia, & Bhatt, 2023). SVO targets the fundamental predicate-argument structure, allowing a direct, interpretable mapping of actors, actions, and consequences. This explicit structural representation offers insight into agency, causality, and how humans construct narratives, reflecting central aspects of human cognition such as 3self-understanding and event comprehension (Stella et al., 2024). By extracting SVOs from texts, researchers can obtain a nuanced understanding of phenomena like problem framing, attribution of blame, and cognitive biases within narratives (Abramski et al., 2024; Reiter-Haas, Kl¨ osch, Hadler, & Lex, 2024; Sheikh et al., 2023). For example, SVO structures have been used in research on causal networks (Sheikh et al., 2023) and analy-sis of suicide notes (Teixeira et al., 2021). Recently, Sheikh et al. (2023) introduced SCANER, a framework transforming raw text into causal networks. Their methodology involves manual text simplification followed by standard pre-processing, leading to automatic Subject-Verb-Object extraction. These structures are sub-sequently filtered using a 3,000-word dictionary of causal trigger words augmented via WordNet (Miller, 1995) in order to generate causal networks where subjects are “cause” nodes, objects are “effect” nodes, and verbs label relationships (Sheikh et al., 2023). In another study, Teixeira et al. (2021), researchers employed NLP and network science techniques to analyze suicide notes, with a particular focus on self-perceptions and psychological states of the writer. This approach integrates cognitive data and linguistic benchmarks to extract ideas and emotions, clarifying relationships between concepts and their roles (Teixeira et al., 2021). However, this analysis relied on an unimodal network approach (i.e., a network composed of nodes of the same type or category) that did not distinguish between subjects, verbs, and objects as separate groups of nodes, thereby limiting the potential for investigating emotional, syntactic, or semantic framing. 

# 1.3 Overview of the TEA Nets framework 

This manuscript introduces TEA Nets as a novel text analysis framework inspired by cognitive science and based on Artificial Intelligence (AI). These networks map relational information among subjects (“Agents”), verbs (“Events”), and objects (“Targets”) within a given text. Unlike Teixeira et al. (2021), we keep these three components as distinct groups of nodes so that sentences are represented as undirected almost-tripartite graphs, i.e. TEA Nets. In graph theory, tripartite graphs would partition nodes into three groups and feature edges only between nodes belonging to different groups (Newman, 2018). Within this novel framework, networks partition nodes as concepts assigned to Agent, Event, or Target groups and also tend to focus on connections between these three categories. However, TEA Nets are almost-tripartite because they also feature relationships between nodes of the same group, i.e. either synonym relationships or concepts having the same role in a given sentence. Figure 1 provides an overview of the TEA Nets construction pipeline. Our methodology processes text by extracting Subject-Verb-Object (SVO; (Gollob, 1974; Greenberg et al., 1963)), which forms the basis for TEA Nets construction and analysis. SVO tables contain several types of information, including hypergraph descriptions. Hypergraphs are mathematical generalizations of pairwise networks where edges can encompass more than two nodes at a time in the so-called hyperedges (Citraro et al., 2023). TEA Nets can be considered as hypergraphs when merging together more than two words at a time. For instance, when considering “terrible tasting wine” as a single entity/node one could: (i) consider “terrible”, “tasting”, “wine” as separate nodes belonging to the same hyperedge; or (ii) consider “terrible tasting wine” as aggregated in a single node. Case (i) would correspond to building TEA Nets as semantic hypergraphs. Case (ii) would correspond to visualizing TEA Nets as pairwise networks with nodes containing composite expressions. We believe these two approaches can exploit the power of semantic hypergraph representations of language (Citraro et al., 2023) while simplifying past approaches in the literature (Menezes & Roth, 2019). 

# 2 Methodology 

Fig. 1 provides a visual overview of the Target-Event-Agent Networks (TEA Nets) construction pipeline. The pipeline processes raw text through a sequence of defined stages: text cleaning and coreference resolution (Fig. 1A-B, cf. Section 2.1.1), syntactic and semantic parsing (Fig. 1C, cf. Section 2.1.2), Subject-Verb-Object (SVO) extraction with passive voice handling (Fig. 1D, cf. Section 2.1.3), and network construction (Fig. 4Fig. 1 : Target-Event-Agent Networks (TEA Nets) construction pipeline. This figure illustrates the step-by-step process underlying the TEA Nets framework for extracting relational structure. Beginning with natural language input (A), the process involves data cleaning and coreference resolution (B), syntactic parsing (C), Subject-Verb-Object (SVO) triplet extraction (D), and produces the final TEA Nets (E). 1E, cf. Section 2.1.5). Section 2.2 introduces the network-level measures adopted throughout our analyses, while Section 2.3 presents the validation methodology for the SVO extraction. 

Code Availability. The Python library implementing Target-Event-Agent Networks is publicly available on GitHub: https://github.com/MassimoStel/TEA Networks (Accessed: 28/04/2026), allowing researchers to reproduce and extend our framework across different domains. 

# 2.1 TEA Nets Construction 

We follow Fig. 1 to outline the different stages of construction for TEA Nets starting from a given text. 52.1.1 Coreference resolution 

Before any structural analysis can take place, the text must be made internally consistent: pronouns and other referring expressions need to be anchored to the entities they stand for. In order to achieve this, the TEA Nets pipeline uses the FastCoref library (Otmazgin, Cattan, & Goldberg, 2022) as its default resolver. Starting from the raw input (Fig. 1A), the module first groups expressions that likely refer to the same entity into clusters. Then, it identifies any pronouns within these clusters (such as “they” or “it”) and replaces them with the most informative explicit mention available. We then use the resulting coreferenced text (Fig. 1B) as input for the downstream parsing stages. Because we designed the pipeline to be modular, we can easily integrate alternative coreference resolvers, such as Stanza (Qi, Zhang, Zhang, Bolton, & Manning, 2020), without modifying other components. 

2.1.2 Syntactic and Semantic Parsing 

The coreferenced text is processed through a standard NLP pipeline built on the Python library spaCy 

(Explosion, 2025), utilizing the transformer-based en core web trf model. The system performs three sequential operations: first, Part-of-Speech (POS) tagging assigns a gram-matical category to each token (e.g., “Alex” as a proper noun, “care” as a verb). Next, dependency parsing maps the syntactic relations between tokens, generating a dependency tree like the one shown in Fig. 1C (where “Alex” is the nominal subject of “care”). Finally, lemmatization and Named Entity Recognition (NER) work together to normalize inflected words to their base forms (e.g., “hiking” becomes “hike”) and identify semantic entities such as people and locations. 

2.1.3 Subject-Verb-Object (SVO) extraction 

Once the document is fully annotated, the pipeline extracts Subject-Verb-Object triples. The module first identifies verb candidates (tokens tagged as VERB or AUX whose dependency role is not auxiliary, adjectival, or prepositional) and, for each one, it attempts to recover three components. – Subjects are tokens carrying nsubj or nsubjpass labels; passive constructions are detected by a dedicated module ( §2.1.4) that remaps the grammatical subject to its correct semantic role. The extraction function also handles coordinated subjects like “Alice and Bob” and cases where a subject must be inherited from an ancestor verb in a conjoined clause, which is a frequent source of errors in simpler extractors. – Verb phrases bundle the main verb lemma with auxiliaries, negations, adverbial modifiers, and any verbs linked via xcomp or ccomp relations. The idea is to capture “did not seem to care” as a unit rather than stripping it down to “care”. – Objects cover direct objects ( dobj ), prepositional objects ( pobj ), indirect objects ( dative ), clausal complements ( ccomp , xcomp ), and objects inherited from conjoined verbs. Each extracted triplet is stored as pairwise relations (Subject →Verb, Verb →Object) in a structured DataFrame (Fig. 1D), with additional hypergraph-level information linking all three elements of the same triplet. Each row carries two binary flags related to the voice of the verb. The first flag, is passive , simply records whether the verbal construction is passive (1) or active (0). The second flag, passive approx ,equals 1 when the verb is passive but no explicit agent ( by -phrase) was found in the text; in these cases the grammatical subject (i.e. the patient) is placed in the Agent slot as the best available approximation rather than being discarded. Downstream analyses can filter on these flags to distinguish genuine agentive relations from approximated ones or to study the overall usage of passive voice ( §2.1.4). 62.1.4 Passive Voice Handling 

Passive voice is one of the most challenging aspects of SVO extraction, and misidentifying it has significant consequences for narrative analysis: treating the grammatical subject as the semantic agent can turn victims into perpetrators and vice versa (Abramski et al., 2024). The pipeline detects passive constructions through four independent signals, evaluated by a dedicated function: – Canonical passive. The verb carries dependents labeled auxpass (or aux:pass ) and/or nsubjpass 

(nsubj:pass ). This covers standard be -passives (“I was raped”) as well as get -passives (“He got arrested”), which en core web trf analyzes identically. – Feel-passive. The verb is a past participle (POS tag VBN ) and has a child with dep=aux whose lemma is not a modal or copula (e.g. “I felt abused”, “She seemed targeted”). In these constructions spaCy does not use auxpass , so the canonical check alone would miss them. We maintain a whitelist of non-passive auxiliary lemmas ( be, have, do, will, shall, would, should, could, might, may, must, can ) and treat any other auxiliary before a VBN as a passive signal. – Agent-phrase. The verb is VBN and has a child with dep=agent (a by -phrase), regardless of the auxiliary type. This catches cases like “He appeared beaten by the crowd”, where the parser treats “appeared” as the main verb and “beaten” as an xcomp or oprd complement. – Coordinated conjunct. The verb is VBN with dep=conj and its head verb is itself passive (as determined recursively by the same function). This handles sentences such as “I was held down and raped”, where “raped” has no auxiliary of its own but shares the passive frame of “held”. If the head verb has an explicit agent, it is propagated to the conjunct. Once a verb is identified as passive, the algorithm follows one of two paths. If an explicit by -phrase is present (the dependency path agent → pobj ), the object of that preposition is assigned to the Agent role as the semantic actor, while the grammatical subject is moved to Target . For example, “I was raped by my uncle” maps to Agent = uncle, Event = rape, Target = I. The same logic applies to coordinated passives such as “The report was written and reviewed by the committee”, where the agent may attach to a conjoined verb rather than the root. When no by -phrase is present, the semantic agent is unobserved. The current implementation retains the grammatical subject as an approximated placeholder and marks the row with passive approx = 1 ;however, downstream analysis of agency should either exclude these rows or treat the Agent value as an unresolved patient placeholder rather than as a true semantic agent (with is passive set to 1). This flag allows downstream analyses to distinguish genuine agentive relations from approximated ones: for instance, a perpetrator-frequency analysis can exclude rows with passive approx = 1 to avoid counting victims as agents, while a victim-exposure analysis can select precisely those rows to quantify how often assault events are narrated without naming a perpetrator. Furthermore, having an explicit is passive flag for all rows allows researchers to easily aggregate and compare the prevalence of active versus passive narrative framing across the corpus. Finally, for any verb flagged as passive, the subject-extraction function returns immediately, preventing the inheritance mechanism from climbing the dependency tree and erroneously assigning an active ancestor’s subject to the passive verb. Without this guard, a sentence like “I went out and got raped” would assign “I” as the active agent of “raped”, because the verb “went” (an active ancestor) carries “I” as its nsubj .

2.1.5 Network dataframe and node/links attributes 

Subjects, verbs, and objects become nodes labelled with their respective roles ( Agent , Event , Target ), forming a tripartite graph. Undirected edges connect subjects to verbs and verbs to objects. The visual representation of the network encodes several layers of information: edge thickness maps to the weight of the syntactic relations, while edge colors indicate the sentiment interaction between the connected nodes. Each node 7receives a sentiment polarity score (positive, negative, or neutral) from the VADER lexicon (Hutto & Gilbert, 2014), which determines its color. We chose VADER over learned sentiment models because its rule-based design makes the scoring easy to interpret and reproduce. Intra-layer edges, shown as dashed lines in the figures, link nodes of the same syntactic role and can reflect coreference associations or semantic relations such as synonymy via WordNet (Miller, 1995). Finally, relations marked with passive approx can be visually distinguished with dotted lines, separating approximated victim-in-Agent relations from genuine agentive edges. 

# 2.2 Measures for text analysis with TEA Nets 

An important advantage of turning textual unstructured data into a network is relative to being able to apply several network measures for the investigation of texts. We define here a set of quantities for TEA Nets-based analysis. These quantities are not exhaustive, but they provide a concrete starting point. 

Degree (K) counts the distinct edges connecting a node to nodes of a different type. For an Agent 

node, K is the number of unique Event -nodes it links to. 

Relative degree normalizes degree within a role category: 

K∗ 

> i

= Ki

P  

> j̸=i

Kj

. (1) 

Lemma frequency (F ) records the total occurrences of a lemma across all relevant edges, regardless of syntactic function. 

Repetitiveness Index (RI) measures how repetitively a lemma is used: RI i = Fi

Ki

. (2) High values of RI mean that the same lemma appears repeatedly in a small number of connections, whereas low values reflect a more varied structural use. 

Edge weight measures how often a specific syntactic relation occurs (e.g., Ben –dislike ). The normalized version, NW e,S = Fe,S 

P 

> e′∈Etype ,S

Fe′,S 

, (3) allows comparison across sub-corpora of different sizes. 

Prominence measures how much more (or less) central an edge is in one sub-corpus with respect to another: 

Pe = NW e, 1 − NW e, 2. (4) 

# 2.3 Validation of the SVO Extraction Pipeline 

For validation, we built a benchmark of 122 English sentences designed to stress-test the extraction module on the syntactic phenomena most likely to cause problems. The first 100 sentences form a general benchmark covering simple active clauses, passive constructions with and without an explicit agent, progressive and 8perfect tenses, modals, negation, yes/no and wh- interrogatives, relative clauses, coordinated subjects and objects, double-object constructions, infinitival complements ( xcomp ), adverbial subordinates, intransitive verbs, and existential constructions. The remaining 22 sentences target passive voice specifically, including canonical be -passives, get -passives (e.g. “He got arrested by the police”), feel-passives with non-standard auxiliaries (e.g. “I felt abused by him”, “She seemed targeted”), coordinated passive conjuncts (e.g. “I was held down and raped”), and negative controls consisting of active sentences with superficially similar structure (e.g. “She got lucky”, “He felt happy”). After excluding one ambiguous sentence, the final benchmark contains 122 sentences: 71 active and 51 passive, of which 23 include an explicit by -agent and 27 are agentless. Each sentence was manually annotated with its gold-standard Agent , Event (lemmatized), and Target 

semantic roles following the TEA convention described in §2.1.3–2.1.4. For active constructions, the gram-matical subject maps to Agent and the object to Target (e.g. “The cat chased the mouse” → Agent = cat, 

Event = chase, Target = mouse). For passive constructions with an explicit agent, the by -phrase argu-ment maps to Agent and the grammatical subject to Target (e.g. “The mouse was chased by the cat” →

Agent = cat, Event = chase, Target = mouse). For agentless passives, the grammatical subject is kept in 

Agent as a best-available approximation with the passive approx flag set to 1 (e.g. “The window was bro-ken” → Agent = window, Event = break, Target = ∅). The benchmark and the annotation notebook are released with the library. We compare two extractors against the gold annotations. 

Baseline. A minimal dependency-based extractor that processes one sentence at a time. For each sen-tence, it locates the ROOT verb in the dependency tree produced by spaCy and collects the grammatical subject ( nsubj or nsubjpass dependent) and the first available object ( dobj , pobj , attr , acomp , ccomp , or the object of a prepositional or xcomp complement). When the subject carries the nsubjpass label or the verb has an agent dependent ( by -phrase), the extractor applies the same syntactic-to-semantic mapping used in the gold annotations: in passive constructions with an explicit agent the object of the by -phrase becomes the predicted Agent and the grammatical subject becomes the predicted Target ; in agentless passives the grammatical subject is placed in the Agent slot. In active constructions the grammatical subject maps to 

Agent and the object to Target . This baseline isolates the contribution of spaCy ’s dependency parser with-out any of the additional heuristics (verb-phrase bundling, subject inheritance, coordinated-object handling) introduced by the full TEA pipeline. 

TEA Nets. The full extraction pipeline described in sections 2.1.3–2.1.4. For each sentence, 

extract svos() returns a relational DataFrame from which the first Agent →Event and Event →Target edges are taken as the predicted triple. 

Performance Measurements. Accuracy is computed separately for each semantic role ( Agent , Event ,

Target ) by comparing the predicted lemma against the gold lemma after lowercasing and treating empty predictions and empty gold values as none . True positives are counted only when both prediction and gold are non-empty and match. 

Passive Voice Validation. To evaluate the passive-handling algorithm independently from role assign-ment, we use the crowd-sourced dataset released with PassivePy (Sepehri, Mirshafiee, & Markowitz, 2023). This dataset comprises 1,150 English sentences drawn from diverse online sources, each independently anno-tated for passive voice by human raters via Amazon Mechanical Turk. Of these, 216 sentences (18.8%) are labeled as passive and 934 (81.2%) as active. For each sentence, the TEA pipeline’s passive info() func-tion is applied to every verb candidate, and the sentence is predicted as passive if at least one verb is flagged. We report per-class Correct, Total, and Accuracy for both the Passive and Active classes, together with the macro average. 92.3.1 Validation Results 

Table 1 reports accuracy for both the baseline extractor and TEA Nets across the three semantic roles on the 122-sentence benchmark. Table 2 reports passive voice detection performance on the 1,150-sentence PassivePy crowd-sourced dataset. 

Table 1: Accuracy for the baseline SVO extractor and TEA Nets on the 122-sentence benchmark, evaluated separately for each semantic role.                             

> Extractor Role Correct Total Accuracy Baseline Agent 109 122 0.893 Baseline Event 85 122 0.697 Baseline Target 96 122 0.787 TEA Nets Agent 111 122 0.910
> TEA Nets Event 99 122 0.811
> TEA Nets Target 105 122 0.861

Table 2 : Passive voice detection evaluated against the PassivePy crowd-sourced dataset (1,150 sentences with human annotations).             

> Class Correct Total Accuracy Passive 206 216 0.954 Active 911 934 0.975 Macro Avg 1117 1150 0.971

# 3 Case studies 

The TEA Nets framework offers a powerful and comprehensive approach for narrative analysis by system-atically identifying entities, interactions, and associated emotional valences. We demonstrate its practical utility and versatility within three distinct case studies. In Section 3.1 we present an analysis of high- and low-similarity conspiracy documents drawn from the LOCO corpus (Miani, Hills, & Bangerter, 2022). In Section 3.2 we use the TEA Nets Python library to process and analyze a corpus of Reddit posts and comments discussing sexual assault, focusing on how agents are linguistically represented in active and passive constructions. In Section 3.3 we apply TEA Nets to a comparative investigation of counseling dialogues involving both human patients and Large Language Model-enhanced virtual patients (De Duro, Improta, & Stella, 2025). 

# 3.1 Case 1: Analysis of psychological social media posts about conspiracy theory 

The Target-Event-Agent Networks framework offers a useful approach for information extraction from large corpora, including those involving conspiracy narratives. Traditional NLP methods, specifically those that process surface-level linguistic data (e.g., dictionary-based and Bag-of-Words models), exhibit limitations with syntactic dependencies and the hierarchical organization of information (Kenett & Hills, 2022; Semeraro et al., 2025). Furthermore, these methods fail to extract information regarding claim attribution or implicit causal link establishment (Sheikh et al., 2023). By explicitly modeling causality and agency, the TEA Nets framework is suited to conspiracy-narrative analysis by extracting structured information that enables formal grammar investigation and delineation of main roles within conspiracy narratives (Reiter-Haas et al., 2024). We implemented a case study designed to illustrate the capabilities of Target-Event-Agent Networks. In order to do so, we employed a dedicated dataset of conspiracy documents (Language of Conspiracy; (Miani et al., 2022)). It is important to note that this case study is intended to be illustrative only and does not constitute an exhaustive analysis of conspiracy texts. For broader investigations, see (Gagliardi, 2025; Gambini, Tardelli, & Tesconi, 2024). 10 3.1.1 Dataset 

To illustrate the utility of the TEA Nets, we adopted the LOCO corpus (Miani et al., 2022) for the study of conspiracy theories. This corpus comprises 96 , 743 standalone documents extracted from various websites. Our analysis focuses on the 23 , 937 documents within the conspiracy subcorpus, gathered from websites specifically identified as promoting conspiracy content. For our comparative analysis, we divided the conspir-acy subcorpus into two distinct subsets based on the cosine similarity metadata field. This information makes it possible to measure how closely the language of each document matches the average linguistic pro-file of all conspiracy documents in the subcorpus, using cosine similarity. Cosine similarity values exceeding one standard deviation above the mean were flagged as “conspiracy representative” in the dataset meta-data. Following this definition, our “high-conspiracy documents” subset comprised the 4 , 227 texts flagged as “conspiracy representative” ( cosine similarity > mean + SD ). Conversely, for the “low-similarity con-spiracy documents” another 4 , 227 texts were selected from those documents exhibiting the lowest cosine similarity values within the dataset. This approach enables a direct comparison between documents that are most and least characteristic of the conspiracy discourse. Since this selection process accentuates differences, it minimizes overlap between the high-conspiracy and low-similarity conspiracy groups, providing a basis for identifying linguistic and thematic distinctions within the conspiracy subcorpus. To ensure consistency and mitigate confounding variables, we prioritized topic matching over the use of diverse datasets. While aligning thematic content across different sources presents significant methodological challenges, our approach suc-cessfully maintained this coherence. Future research should focus on the curated construction of balanced datasets specifically designed for topic matching between conspiratorial and non-conspiratorial narratives. 

3.1.2 Methods 

For each of the 4 , 227 texts, the teanets.extract svos from text() function was used to extract SVOs and create an SVO DataFrame . This procedure was systematically applied to all documents in our cor-pus, with each document’s SVOs being saved in its respective DataFrame . Subsequently, we used the 

teanets.analytics.merge svo dataframes() to aggregate the individual SVOs into a single unified 

DataFrame for each set of documents (i.e., high-conspiracy and low-similarity conspiracy categories). We focused on examining the aggregated SVO data using the functions provided with the TEA Networks Python library. We computed network-based measures (see Section 2.2), such as node degree, to quantify and characterize the syntactic relationships embedded within the texts. To analyze differences between high-conspiracy and low-similarity conspiracy documents, normalized edge weight served as the basis for two comparative analyses: Kendall’s τ correlation and prominence analysis. To assess the commonality of the ranking of verb usage for a given subject across these two document types, Kendall’s τ correlation was employed. For this measure, “Agent-Event” edges connected to a specific “Agent” node of interest were selected from both high-conspiracy and low-similarity conspiracy documents. The normalized edge weight was retrieved for each of these selected edges in both document sets. For example, considering the “I” pronoun as an “Agent” node, the edge “I-think” had a normalized edge weight of 0 .0078 in high-conspiracy documents and 0 .0019 in low-similarity conspiracy documents. Other verbs connected to “I” in both document sets included “attend” and “assume”. In total, 626 such shared “Agent-Event” edges were identified for the “I” pronoun. Kendall’s τ was then calculated on the normalized edge weights of these 626 shared edges. Subsequently, prominence analysis calculated an edge’s prominence as the difference between its nor-malized edge weight in high-conspiracy documents and low-similarity conspiracy documents (as detailed in Section 2.2, Equation 4). For example, if the “I-think” (“Agent-Event”) edge had a normalized edge weight of .0078 in high-conspiracy documents and .0019 in low-similarity conspiracy documents, a differ-ence of .0059 indicates this edge was more prominent in the high-conspiracy narrative. For visualization, the 

teanets.teaplot.plot svo graph() was employed to illustrate the relationships between subjects, verbs, and objects. To enrich the representation, we paired the network with “emotional flowers” as developed by 11 Semeraro et al. (2025) for each class of documents (conspiracy and low-similarity conspiracy categories). These visualizations summarize the emotions expressed in texts by depicting the z-scores associated with each emotion (as elicited from a text) tested against a random baseline. Details on EmoAtlas implementation and rationale can be found in Semeraro et al. (2025). 

3.1.3 Results 

“You”, “I” and “we” highlight repetitive conspiratorial narratives. 

To investigate the content of conspiracy narratives, we employed Degree ( K), Lemma Frequency ( F ), and Repetitiveness Index ( RI ) analysis (see Section 2.2). Table 3 presents the top 20 “Agent” and “Event” nodes for both high- and low-similarity conspiracy documents within the LOCO dataset. In general, across both node types (“Agent” and “Event”), absolute frequency and degree values are higher in high-conspiracy documents compared to low-similarity conspiracy documents. 

Table 3 : The degree ( K), lemma frequency ( F ), and Repetitiveness Index ( RI = F/K ) for the top 20 “Agent” (subject) and “Event” (verb) nodes in the LOCO dataset are presented, identified from Subject-Verb-Object (SVOs) derived from both high- and low-similarity conspiracy documents. All degree and frequency values are expressed in thousands.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             

> High-Conspiracy Low-similarity conspiracy Agent KFRI Event KFRI Agent KFRI Event KFRI you 18.1 56.6 3.1 be 77.7 418.9 5.4 you 2.6 3.4 1.3 be 12.8 58.6 4.6 we 17.6 69.5 3.9 have 13.9 114.6 8.3 we 1.8 4.1 2.2 say 4.2 5.0 1.2 I16.8 64.9 3.9 say 12.2 25.1 2.1 it 1.6 10.9 6.8 have 2.6 16.5 6.3 it 9.0 89.0 9.9 make 6.6 19.8 3.0 I1.1 2.4 2.1 find 1.6 2.3 1.5 they 4.9 79.9 16.3 see 6.5 17.6 2.7 that 0.9 20.5 22.4 show 1.4 2.2 1.6 people 4.9 31.6 6.5 know 5.8 21.1 3.7 people 0.6 2.8 4.6 use 1.4 4.0 2.9 that 4.6 150.7 32.7 take 5.6 16.1 2.9 who 0.6 4.1 7.3 include 1.3 2.2 1.6 who 3.8 37.2 9.7 call 5.6 12.3 2.2 which 0.5 4.7 8.8 make 1.3 3.0 2.3 those 3.0 13.2 4.4 be not 5.6 --those 0.4 1.4 3.1 take 1.3 2.3 1.9 this 2.3 75.1 32.7 use 5.2 19.1 3.7 researcher 0.4 0.9 2.6 report 1.1 2.9 2.6 which 2.1 27.6 12.9 tell 4.7 10.2 2.2 scientist 0.4 1.0 2.6 tell 1.0 1.0 1.0 one 2.1 30.2 14.3 become 4.6 9.3 2.0 they 0.4 5.2 14.3 call 1.0 1.5 1.6 government 2.0 20.6 10.1 give 4.6 11.0 2.4 this 0.4 9.7 26.7 see 0.9 1.9 2.0 trump 1.9 9.3 5.0 get 4.3 15.0 3.5 company 0.3 1.4 4.4 give 0.8 1.2 1.5 man 1.8 9.4 5.1 include 4.3 8.7 2.1 one 0.3 3.9 13.0 cause 0.8 2.1 2.6 all 1.8 38.8 21.1 do 4.1 53.7 13.1 some 0.3 2.1 7.4 know 0.7 1.9 2.5 god 1.6 10.3 6.2 go 3.9 20.8 5.4 group 0.3 1.4 5.1 be not 0.7 --some 1.6 14.3 8.9 think 3.9 10.1 2.6 study 0.3 2.6 9.6 provide 0.7 0.9 1.3 what 1.6 30.8 19.2 find 3.8 9.5 2.5 what 0.3 2.2 8.4 add 0.7 0.9 1.3 anyone 1.3 3.0 2.2 come 3.8 14.3 3.8 woman 0.3 0.9 3.6 write 0.7 0.7 1.0

The analysis of the “Agent” nodes reveals distinct patterns in subject representation across high- and low-similarity conspiracy document types within the LOCO dataset. As reported in Table 3, in high-conspiracy documents, “you” ( K = 18 .1, F = 56 .6), “we” ( K = 17 .6, F = 69 .5), and “I” ( K = 16 .8, 

F = 64 .9) all exhibit high and comparable degrees, i.e. a large number of connections with several action (“Event”) nodes. These larger degrees indicate the prominence of these pronouns in collective narratives, i.e. “Agent” nodes with larger degrees are linked with more actions and thus are prominent in the narratives encoded within the corpus. Conversely, in low-similarity conspiracy documents, these pronouns show lower degrees and frequencies (“you”: K = 2 .6, F = 3 .4; “I”: K = 1 .1, F = 2 .4; “we”: K = 1 .8, F = 4 .1). The 12 Repetitiveness Index ( RI ) values for first and second-person pronouns in high-conspiracy documents are: “I” ( RI = 3 .9), “you” ( RI = 3 .1) and “we” ( RI = 3 .9). This means that, for instance, “I” is mentioned roughly four times in connection with the same action (verb) node. In low-similarity conspiracy documents, 

RI values are lower (“I”: RI = 2 .1, “you”: RI = 1 .3, “we”: RI = 2 .2). These patterns indicate that high-conspiracy documents use ”you”, ”I”, and ”we” in relation to the same actions roughly twice as often as low-similarity conspiracy documents, reflecting a more constrained and repetitive style. 

The elevated RI for “I” in high-conspiracy texts may reflect a pronounced self-referential linguistic pattern. 

The Repetitiveness Index (RI) for the “Agent” node “I” is 3 .9 in high-conspiracy documents, almost double the 2 .1 observed in low-similarity conspiracy documents. This difference is noteworthy considering TEA Nets’ lemmatisation process, which consolidates variations of “I” (e.g., me, myself) to their root form for analysis. The elevated RI for “I” in high-conspiracy texts may therefore reflect a pronounced self-referential linguistic pattern, consistent with prior findings on the use of reflexive and possessive pronouns in conspir-acy discourse (Recordare, Cola, Fagni, & Tesconi, 2024). 

The “Agent” node “god” is prevalent in high-conspiracy documents. 

Among the most central “Agent” nodes in high-conspiracy documents, “god” ranks 16th, exhibiting a degree of 1 , 642 and a frequency of 10 , 260. Its Repetitiveness Index was 6 .24. Conversely, in low-similarity conspiracy documents, “god” ranks 1339th, with a degree of 12, an edge frequency of 376, and a Repetitive-ness Index of 31 .33. Lower Repetitiveness Index, coupled with higher degree, indicates “god” connects to a broader range of actions within high-conspiracy documents rather than forming concentrated associations. The prominence of “god” in high-conspiracy narratives can be attributed to several interconnected factors. First, conspiracy narratives often refer to religious ideas and motifs, providing a foundation for the term’s prominence in this discourse (Fong, Roozenbeek, Goldwert, Rathje, & Van Der Linden, 2021). Second, the increased use of profanity and emotionally charged language in conspiracy narratives (Gambini et al., 2024; Giachanou, Ghanem, & Rosso, 2023) results in the frequent appearance of the word ”god” within expletive phrases, thereby incorporating this concept into a wide array of reactive or emotional expressions. Taken together, this peculiar usage of the word ”god” in high-conspiracy documents may account for the node’s numerous yet widely distributed connections, resulting in a lower Repetitiveness Index despite its high overall degree. 

Despite limited overlap, TEA Nets reveal distinct verb associations on “Agent-Event” edges. 

Out of 909 , 184 “Agent-Event” edges extracted from both high- and low-similarity conspiracy documents, only 1.98% (18,256) are present in both subcorpora. This low overlap indicates distinct linguistic patterns between high- and low-similarity conspiracy documents (Giachanou et al., 2023). To explore this overlap, correlation and prominence analyses were conducted on the shared subset. Kendall’s τ correlation values for “Agent” nodes “I” ( τ = 0 .458, p < . 001), “you” ( τ = 0 .440, p < . 001), and “we” ( τ = 0 .463, p < . 001) indicate that verbs highly frequent with these pronouns in one document type tend to maintain a similarly high rank in the other. However, these correlations are notably less than one, suggesting relevant qualitative differences in verb usage despite shared high-ranking patterns. To further explore these observed differences in “Agent-Event” edges, prominence analysis was performed. Table 4 reports the top 20 prominent “Agent-Event” edges. The “Agent” nodes “I”, “you”, and “we” were selected for this prominence analysis due to their usage across the subcorpora and their differential Repetitiveness Index. By analyzing the prominence, we found a distinct link between pronouns and actions. High-conspiracy documents tend to link these pronouns with verbs expressing conviction (“think”, “know”, “believe”), and conveying action (“do”, “get”, “call”, “bring”, “make”, “say”). Low-similarity conspiracy documents, conversely, use verbs emphasizing information exchange (“search”, “read”, “uncover”, “recommend”) and transactional engagement (“order”, 13 “follow”, “download”). 

Table 4 : 20 most prominent edges connecting “I”, “you”, and “we” pronouns as “Agent” nodes to “Event” nodes for high-conspiracy documents (HC) and low-similarity conspiracy documents (LC).                                                                                                                                  

> Pronoun Iyou we Document Set HC LC HC LC HC LC Rank 1be stay be order today be must make 2think ’ve publish know can follow have ’ve see 3know ’ve work let check know halt 4have ’ve tell see note see discuss 5say will receive do visit do collectively face 6believe add think download present ’ll look 7see do not recommend have join give present here 8write paint remember click here live spread 9tell request look share can read test 10 make recommend live watch get apologize 11 do uncover say support call be have 12 mean search take crosspost bring conclude 13 hear ’ve make will be drink be not project 14 get maybe ’m give read here make will update 15 be not love most believe mix go must not allow 16 do not know ’d like add get sign here tell demonstrate 17 ask first write do think order here believe determine 18 feel ever run understand forward take search 19 find ’m use ask follow become propose 20 call scroll read pour think ’re live

TEA Nets assess how narratives link actors and consequences with specific emotional actions. 

Figure 2 provides a comparative analysis of TEA Nets (top panels) and emotional profiles (bottom panels), differentiating between conspiracy (left panels) and low-similarity conspiracy documents (right panels). The upper section displays TEA Nets, with the left panel representing a network derived from high-conspiracy documents and the right panel from low-similarity conspiracy documents. These networks are specifically filtered to highlight “you” as a subject and “people” as an object, showcasing a selection of verbs that form SVOs. The emotional flowers at the bottom of Figure 2 reveal interesting differences. In low-similarity conspiracy documents (see Figure 2, bottom left), the actions used to bridge “you” and “people” report only weak positive emotions. Weakness comes from the fact that when EmoAtlas identifies only two actions providing the same emotion by default, a z-score close to the rejection region ( z ≈ 2) is automatically reported by the library (Semeraro et al., 2025). This means that in low-similarity conspiracy documents, narratives syntactically bridge “you” and “peo-ple” with slightly positive or mostly neutral jargon, like “help” or “treat”, with exceptions including negative expressions like “do not love”. Instead, in high-conspiracy documents, actions show stronger anger compo-nents ( z ≈ 2.63) and anticipation ( z ≈ 2.80), which are further apart from the rejection region ( |z| < 1.96). This difference indicates that conspiracy narratives tend to express anger in actions specifying how the “you” node relates to the “people” node. This pattern is not mirrored in low-similarity conspiracy documents. Such a difference highlights how TEA Nets, when integrated with external tools like EmoAtlas (Semeraro et al., 2025), can reveal nuanced differences in terms of specific portions of narratives across two groups. 14 Fig. 2 : Analysis of “You” acting on “people” in the LOCO dataset. The top row displays SVO relation-ships extracted from low-similarity conspiracy documents (left) and high-conspiracy documents (right). The bottom row shows emotional flowers derived from the valence of verbs associated with these SVOs in the respective document sets. 

3.1.4 Case-Specific Discussion 

The TEA Nets framework, by explicitly identifying actors, actions, and consequences, allows the characteri-zation of plot structures and roles within these narratives (Reiter-Haas et al., 2024), overcoming traditional models’ limitations in distinguishing actor from victim or attributing responsibility (Sheikh et al., 2023). Network-based linguistic measures highlight the practical utility of the TEA Nets Python library. Analysis of pronoun usage through degree, frequency, and Repetitiveness Index revealed self-referential and collec-tive narrative patterns in high-conspiracy documents. This index combined frequency counts in texts with the syntactic network structure of Target-Event-Agent Networks, providing insights unavailable to mere fre-quency counts used in prior works (Fong et al., 2021; Klein, Clutton, & Polito, 2018; Miani et al., 2022). For instance, high Repetitiveness Index values for “I” when considered as a subject in high-conspiracy texts 15 reflected a self-referential linguistic pattern, consistent with prior research (Recordare et al., 2024) and even with other linguistic markers, focused on ego-centered pronouns, found in the original paper introducing the LOCO dataset (Miani et al., 2022). The measurement of “Agent-Event” edge prominence quantifies associations between pronouns and verbs, revealing differences in verb usage across high-conspiracy and low-similarity conspiracy documents. High-conspiracy documents linked “I”, “you”, and “we” pronouns with verbs expressing beliefs and knowledge exchange, while low-similarity conspiracy documents showed a mixed pattern, including scientific terms but also commercial and website-navigation language; this suggests that boilerplate, advertisements, and source-specific content should be filtered before interpreting the contrast as a psychological difference. These patterns aligned with past social-media analyses (Fong et al., 2021; Klein et al., 2018). Earlier longitudinal work on Reddit showed that users who eventually migrate to r/conspiracy already write more “I”, “you”, and “we” (Klein et al., 2018). Cross-platform analyses on Twitter likewise report that both conspiracy influencers and their followers deploy these pronouns to construct in-group solidarity and recruit new adherents (Fong et al., 2021). Our “Agent-Event” edge prominence clarifies how these pronouns are used to express actions: they are syntactically bound to epistemic verbs (e.g., “I believe”, “we know”) expressing agency, beliefs and credibility, whereas low-similarity conspiracy documents foreground more impersonal science-process verbs (e.g., “test”, “measure”, “analyze”). This way of linking personal pronouns and epistemic verbs appears less frequently in low-similarity conspiracy documents. At the syntactic level, TEA Nets highlights a key organizational difference: high-conspiracy prose literally puts believing subjects at the center of the sentence, while low-similarity conspiracy prose suppresses personal agency in favor of impersonal scientific procedures.At the discourse level, large-scale graph analyses indicate that conspiracy corpora are more topically diverse yet tightly linked, producing texts that shift among themes while still maintaining internal coherence.(Miani et al., 2022). Furthermore, TEA Nets uncovered a far higher prominence and repetitiveness of “god” in high-conspiracy texts compared to low-similarity conspiracy narratives, indicating that mentioning this entity is a linguis-tic trademark of conspiratorial discourse, in alignment with past research showing that religion is a highly debated topic in high-conspiracy online texts on Reddit (Fong et al., 2021). Past studies of social media datasets concerning conspiracy beliefs, also identified a negativity bias in the language adopted within con-spiracy narratives (Fong et al., 2021; Klein et al., 2018; Miani et al., 2022). We followed this research direction and found the following trend, quantified via emotional profiling (Semeraro et al., 2025): High-conspiracy actions linking “you” and “people” elicited stronger anger and anticipation compared to the actions expressed between the same actors and consequences but in low-similarity conspiracy texts. This specification not only aligns with past findings but also indicates quantitatively how Target-Event-Agent Networks can be used to test and quantify more specific patterns of language usage in corpora like conspiracy ones. By providing structured syntactic and semantic information, the TEA Nets framework enables a more nuanced, context-aware quantitative assessment of emotional differences than traditional sentiment analysis (Hutto & Gilbert, 2014), which often misses such distinctions due to its lack of contextual association with actors and actions. Future research could integrate edge prominence with narrative-frame detectors to test whether testimonial clauses like “we-know” or “you-must-believe” are used in analogous ways across various topics mentioned by high-conspiracy texts, such as crime, law, or power, as mentioned in (Fong et al., 2021). 

# 3.2 Case 2: Agency in sexual-assault narratives on Reddit 

The TEA Nets library offers a useful framework for information extraction from large corpora, particularly when the separation of active and passive verbal forms is crucial to the analysis. While traditional NLP methods that process surface-level linguistic data (e.g., dictionary-based and Bag-of-Words models) exhibit well-documented limitations with syntactic dependencies and the hierarchical organization of information (Kenett & Hills, 2022; Semeraro et al., 2025), the TEA Nets framework proves well suited to the study 16 of sexual-assault datasets (Abramski et al., 2024) by extracting structured information that enables the identification of plot structures and the delineation of main roles, particularly the identification of the agent (i.e., who performed the action) in both active and passive sentences. We implemented a case study designed to illustrate this capability, employing a dedicated dataset of sexual assault subreddits comprising both posts and comments. 

3.2.1 Dataset 

To illustrate the utility of the TEA Nets framework, we present a case study using the dataset developed by (Abramski et al., 2024) for the study of agency in sexual assault narratives. This corpus comprises 6,418,677 posts and 3,846,797 comments from r/sexualassault . Throughout this work, the term “assault” is used broadly to encompass the main topics discussed in this subreddit, including molestation, rape, assault, and abuse. For our analysis, we processed the Abramski dataset to produce two separate CSV files: one for posts and one for comments. In each file, the TEA Nets library was used to extract Subject-Verb-Object (SVO) triples from every sentence, including the identification of the agent in passive constructions. Since passive-voice resolution is not always certain, we relied on the passive approx binary flag defined in our methodology: a value of 0 indicates that the pipeline confidently identified an explicit agent, while a value of 1 indicates that uncertainty was detected (i.e., the grammatical patient was placed in the agent slot as an approximation). All approximated cases ( passive approx = 1) were discarded, retaining only confident identifications for the analysis. In addition, each row was labeled for voice via the is passive flag, making it possible to focus the analysis on active or passive voice independently. 

3.2.2 Methods 

For each of the 10,265,474 rows in the initial dataset, extract svos from text() was used to extract SVOs and populate a structured DataFrame. We then removed empty texts, deleted duplicate rows, excluded rows for which no relevant assault-related Event was extracted, and retained only rows whose Event lemma matched one of four predefined lemmas: rape , assault , molest , and abuse . The number of rows retained after each filtering step is reported in Table 5. 

Table 5 : Number of rows retained after each filtering step in the Reddit sexual-assault dataset.     

> Filtering Step Rows Retained Initial dataset 10,265,474 Removal of approximated passives and null agents 2,270,075 Selection of target lemmas (rape, assault, molest, abuse) 315,173

Subsequently, using the tagged tabular data, we constructed a dedicated notebook for the analysis. The first post-processing step consisted of defining the set of Events (verbs) relevant to this case study. We focused the analysis on four verbs: rape , assault , molest , and abuse , remapping each inflected form to its infinitive (e.g., raped and raping were both normalized to rape ). A second post-processing step was implemented to define and categorize the agents. Nouns were classified both by gender (Feminine, Masculine, Neutral) and by semantic category (Family, Spouse, Institutional, Vague, etc.). Each gender-by-category combination contains a set of nouns of interest as potential agents, such as guy , man , brother , dad , sister , professor , ex ,and others, derived through synonym extraction. We further filtered all rows to ensure only high-confidence cases were included (excluding passive approx = 1) and conducted separate analyses for active and passive voice forms. For this analysis, the posts and comments datasets were aggregated. 17 3.2.3 Ethical considerations 

This case study was a secondary analysis conducted on the data gathered and fully anonymized originally by Abramski and colleagues (Abramski et al., 2024), in accordance with institutional and platform-specific guidelines for research on public online data (GDPR EU-2016/679). We analyzed only material as present in the already anonymized dataset. We report here only aggregate statistics to impede any attempt of user identification or quote of individual posts. All derived outputs were inspected to minimize the risk of exposing personal information. No novel data was generated nor gathered. 

3.2.4 Results 

The aim of this case study was to identify the key agents perpetrating acts of sexual assault as described in the dataset. The first notable finding concerns the distribution of agent categories by gender and voice. Pronouns and vague descriptors, followed by generic and other categories, account for the vast majority of perpetrators in the dataset. The Family/Spouse category, however, represents a remarkably high share, one that warrants closer inspection in subsequent analyses. In terms of gender, Neutral agents constitute 72.3% of the total, Masculine agents 22.8%, and Feminine agents 4.9%. Notably, terms classified as masculine occur approximately five times more often than terms classified as feminine among the retained agent terms. This should not be interpreted as a direct estimate of perpetrator gender, because many extracted agents are pronouns, vague references, or parser-derived approximations. Regarding voice, active forms account for 62.1% of the analyzed sentences. When all labels are aggregated to identify the most frequent linguistically identified agent terms associated with assault-related Events, the most common nouns are, in descending order: guy , man , brother , dad , people ,

father , cousin . This ranking reveals a deeply troubling pattern in the dataset: after vague and generic terms, the Family/Spouse category constitutes the largest share of identified agents. When the analysis is split by voice, the picture shifts in an even more alarming direction. Pronouns and vague terms, which dominate the active voice, are largely absent from the passive form, where the Fami-ly/Spouse category becomes the most frequent. Specifically, the most common agents in active constructions are I, who , he , guy , you , she , and it ; while in passive constructions, brother appears as the most frequent, followed by someone , family member , man , cousin , friend , father , guy , and dad .Table 6 reports the cross-tabulation between agent gender and grammatical voice. 

Table 6: Cross-tabulation of agent gender category by grammatical voice (active vs. passive) in the sexual-assault Reddit corpus.                

> Gender Category Active Passive Total Feminine 6296 3824 10120 Masculine 28234 17069 45303 Neutral 47431 29123 76554 Total 81961 50016 131977

3.2.5 Case-Specific Discussion 

The results of this case study offer a sobering picture of how sexual violence is narrated and attributed in online survivor communities. Several findings deserve attention. 18 First, the prevalence of vague and pronominal agents in the active voice—terms such as he , guy , or 

who —reflects a broader tendency in personal trauma narratives to describe perpetrators through diffuse or depersonalized language. This may reflect the psychological difficulty of naming the aggressor directly, or simply the conversational register of Reddit posts and comments, where shared context reduces the need for explicit identification (Jaeger, Lindblom, Parker-Guilbert, & Zoellner, 2014; O’Neill, 2018). Second, and more strikingly, the passive voice reveals a markedly different distribution of agents, one in which Family/Spouse terms dominate. This is a linguistically and socially significant finding: when survivors adopt the passive construction, they are more likely to be describing assaults committed by family members (Bohner, 2001; O’Neill, 2018). This may suggest that passivization serves, consciously or not, as a distancing mechanism, a way to recount deeply intimate violations without foregrounding the identity of the perpetrator. The disproportionate presence of relational terms such as brother , father , cousin , and family member in passive constructions points to the compounded difficulty of narrating assault perpetrated within the family unit (K.C. Basile, Smith, Kresnow, Khatiwada, & Leemis, 2022). Third, the overall gender distribution of agents, with Masculine agents appearing nearly five times more frequently than Feminine ones, is consistent with established findings in the broader literature on sexual violence perpetration and reporting (Abramski et al., 2024; K.C. Basile et al., 2022; O’Neill, 2018). Together, these findings demonstrate the analytical value of distinguishing active from passive voice when studying agency in trauma narratives. By leveraging the is passive and passive approx flags, active from passive constructions were separated and only high-confidence agent identifications were retained. Standard NLP approaches that flatten the syntactic structure would likely obscure precisely the patterns that are most meaningful here (Abramski et al., 2024; Bohner, 2001). The TEA Nets framework, by preserving and highlighting these distinctions, enables a more nuanced and linguistically grounded reading of how survivors represent assault and its perpetrators in online discourse. At the same time, the results should be interpreted with caution, as many extracted agents are pronouns, vague references, or parser-derived approximations rather than definitive identifiers of perpetrators. 

# 3.3 Case 3: Comparing mental health transcripts of LLMs (CounseLLMe) and humans (HOPE) 

The TEA Nets framework introduces a new interpretable tool that is designed not only for the analysis of human-written texts, but also for texts produced by Large Language Models (LLMs). Uniquely, TEA Nets enables the automatic and explicit mapping of ”Target-Event-Agent” relationships from extensive corpora, including mental health transcripts from both human and virtual (LLM-generated) patients. Thanks to its capability to capture non-superficial linguistic features that go beyond word-level counts or surface cues (Hutto & Gilbert, 2014; Pennebaker et al., 2001), TEA Nets represents a valuable framework to compare agents, actions and consequences as expressed in narratives by both humans and LLMs. Such a capability is highly relevant to the field of machine psychology, i.e. the emerging field where traditional psychological methodologies are leveraged to assess how closely LLMs can reproduce human behavior (Hagendorff, 2023). Evaluating the fidelity of an LLM-enhanced virtual patient is important (Y. Li et al., 2024; R. Wang et al., 2024), especially when its language is compared with that of human patients (De Duro et al., 2025). That is because, if a virtual patient based on an LLM can accurately mimic real patient behavior, LLMs could represent a valuable tool for training mental health professionals (Y. Li et al., 2024; Lozoya, Conway, De Duro, & D’Alfonso, 2025). In this context, we present an application of the Target-Event-Agent Networks framework to show its potential to uncover key distinctions in the language produced by humans and LLMs, specifically in the context of mental health. 19 3.3.1 Dataset 

For this case study, involving the comparison between human and virtual patients in the mental health domain, we employed two pre-existing datasets: one comprising human transcripts and another consisting of synthetic content produced by LLMs. The first, Mental Health Counseling of Patients (HOPE; (Malhotra, Waheed, Srivastava, Akhtar, & Chakraborty, 2022)), is a dataset available for research purposes, including approximately 12,900 utterances produced by humans in counseling-like interactions, which were extracted from YouTube videos and subsequently transcribed. The second dataset, CounseLLMe (De Duro et al., 2025), contains 400 synthetic counseling dialogues generated through interactions between two LLMs, with one model simulating a patient and the other acting as a therapist. This resource includes conversations generated by multiple models (OpenAI’s GPT-3.5, Anthropic’s Claude 3 Haiku, and LLaMAntino (P. Basile et al., 2023)) across both English and Italian. In our specific case, to match human data, we included only the English subset. CounseLLMe is publicly available at osf.io/2ay8d. 

3.3.2 Methods 

The data pre-processing followed similar steps to those explained for the previous case study (Section 3.1). We applied the function teanets.extract svos from text() to the combined utterances within each tran-script, processing all utterances collectively rather than individually. This resulted in multiple SVOs extracted for each patient category ( NHOP E = 212, NGP T = 100, NHaiku = 100). Finally, individual patients’ SVOs were concatenated. To prevent duplicate entries in the final DataFrame , the SVO IDs were manually incre-mented to ensure that identical dyads (S-V, V-O) did not share the same identifier. This process resulted in three distinct SVO DataFrame s representing human (HOPE dataset) and artificial patients (GPT and Haiku, from CounseLLMe) according to the TEA Nets framework. As in Section 3.1, we combined TEA Nets with other approaches, such as EmoAtlas (Semeraro et al., 2025), but additionally we employed a psy-cholinguistic dictionary including concreteness ratings for more than 40,000 lemmas (Brysbaert, Warriner, & Kuperman, 2014) and the NRC Emotion Intensity Lexicon (Mohammad, 2018) to showcase the versatility of our framework. 

3.3.3 Results 

LLMs and human patients express significant levels of sadness, but humans do so with greater intensity. Empirical evidence shows that patients’ willingness to share their emotions during psychotherapy sessions is strongly linked to better treatment outcomes (Peluso & Freund, 2018). To better understand how such disclosure is manifested in language, we turn our attention to a key linguistic marker of emotional expression, the verb “feel”, which in counseling transcripts can carry profound semantic significance and can signal a form of personal disclosure (Doell, 2013). To uncover what patients actually disclose, we adopt the TEA Nets framework to examine how the first-person subject (“I”) pairs with the verb “feel” and identify the most frequent objects (“Targets”) in that construction. In Figure 3 (top), we present the visualization of the 20 most prominent unique objects (“Targets”) related to the dyad “I-feel” (“Agent-Event”) using 

tea.plot svo graph() .Patients simulated by Claude 3 Haiku reveal a declarative and hyperbolic language related to “feel”. For example, the SVOs “I-feel-even bad” or “I-feel-so lost” highlight the negativity expressed by LLMs when impersonating clinical patients, prompted to manifest depressive symptomatology (De Duro et al., 2025). Similarly, humans also use highly negative expressions (e.g., “I-feel-unfulfilled”, “I-feel-drained”). To systematically assess the representation of specific emotions across the entire set of SVOs, we applied the EmoAtlas tool (Semeraro et al., 2025). Notably, the results indicate the presence of significant levels of joy in Haiku’s outputs when compared to a random baseline ( z ≈ 2.32), a pattern that was not observed in human or GPT-generated texts (see Figure S2, Appendix A.3). Furthermore, expressions of anger are markedly less frequent in Haiku’s output than would be expected by chance ( z ≈ − 2.56). This prevalence of 20 Fig. 3 : Top 20 most frequent objects (“Targets”) associated with the “I-feel” subject-verb pair in transcripts. Human patients are shown on top and Claude 3 Haiku simulated patients are shown on the bottom. These network vizualisations compare self-reported emotional states and experiences expressed through natural language across the two groups. On the top left of each plot, the emotional flower is generated using EmoAtlas, depicting the emotions expressed by the top 20 “I-feel-Target” structures. 21 joy-oriented and scarce anger-related expressions in the ”I-feel-Target” triad may reflect inherent properties of Haiku’s training data, which prioritize accommodation and the maintenance of a positive conversational tone even when the system is prompted to emulate individuals experiencing depressive symptoms. Separately, higher-than-random levels of sadness are found in humans ( z ≈ 3.69), Haiku ( z ≈ 3.11) and GPT ( z ≈ 4.54). Here, human and AI-generated texts successfully captured the core emotional markers associated with a clinical condition such as depression (De Duro et al., 2025). To further clarify whether these differences reflect not just the prevalence but also the intensity of emotional expression, we conducted a subsequent analysis using the NRC Emotion Intensity Lexicon (NRC-EIL; (Mohammad, 2018)) on the whole set of “I”-“feel”-“Target” structures. Focusing solely on words expressing sadness, we compared the emotional intensity of sadness-laden language between Haiku and humans. Interestingly, despite the greater frequency of sadness observed in Haiku’s language (among the top 20 SVOs), human-produced expressions of sadness tended to use words with significantly higher intensity ( U = 1243 .5, p = .036). This pattern was also present for expressions of disgust, where humans again relied on higher-intensity language ( U = 242 .5, p = .042). However, when analyzing the intensity of words associated with other emotions, we did not observe significant differences between groups. These findings align with the recent literature documenting LLMs’ tendency to generate emotionally moderate responses rather than extreme affective states (Fazzi, Skoven Hinge, Heinrich, & Burelli, 2025). Similarly, LLMs were shown to fail in accurately mirroring emotional expressions, even if equally showcasing significant levels of sadness, present in human language (Huang et al., 2024). Although this can provide a more engaging experience for the user in some applications, it raises issues in clinical training contexts where virtual patients are employed, especially if they fail to mirror the intensity and variability of human emotional expression. Prior evidence suggests that increasing the realism of simulated interactions improves training effectiveness for clinicians (Garc´ ıa-Torres, Vicente Ripoll, Fern´ andez Peris, & Mira Solves, 2024), highlighting the need for LLMs to more accurately model the variability of human emotional expression in such settings. 

LLMs use significantly less-concrete actors (“Agent”) when compared to humans. Linguistic analyses of counseling sessions have revealed that pronoun choice can both signal symptom severity and track therapeutic progress (Van Staden & Fulford, 2004). For instance, research has shown that the use of first-person pronouns correlates with depressive symptoms ( r = 0 .13 , α = 0 .05; (Edwards & Holtzman, 2017)). To examine this effect, we analyzed the centrality of actors (subjects) in human and LLM-generated data. Figure 4 presents the 20 most central actors for humans (HOPE), as measured by the within-class relative degree ( K∗, see Section 2.2), along with the values for the same actors found in LLMs’ synthetic data (CounseLLMe). Across the three datasets, the first-person singular pronoun “I” has the highest relative degree, underlining the self-referential language expected from patients in a counseling session (Rogers, 2012), a pattern that extends to LLM-generated dialogues (De Duro et al., 2025). In addition, the pronoun “we”, when used as a subject, displays non-negligible centrality across all sources: humans ( K = 381, K∗ = .0279), GPT-3.5 (K = 50, K∗ = .0154), and Claude 3’s Haiku ( K = 70, K∗ = .0144). These results may suggest the presence of therapeutic alignment in human interaction, as previously shown in humans by Nikzad et al. (2025), and potentially indicate that a similar process can emerge in a simulated counseling scenario generated by LLMs. Additionally, humans produce a wider set of “Agents” that are not reflected in LLMs. Human speak-ers, in addition to situating themselves in their narratives, sometimes refer to other individuals (e.g., “she”, “he”, “mom”) and broader social contexts (e.g., “government”), thereby embedding their experi-ences within specific autobiographical and interpersonal narratives (Conway & Pleydell-Pearce, 2000). LLMs instead tend to use vaguer language. To quantitatively assess this, we assign a concreteness score to each unique “Agent” extracted within TEA Nets, for the three classes using a large psycholinguistic dataset containing 40,000 lemmas associated with concreteness scores (Brysbaert et al., 2014) (see Appendix A.4 for details). We did not find significant differences between LLMs ( UGP T −Haiku = 104 , 292, p = .507). 22 it 

> you
> we
> that
> they
> she
> he
> people
> something
> thing
> everything
> otherpeople
> somebody
> this
> what
> mom
> everybody
> manfriend
> government
> Actor
> 0.00
> 0.02
> 0.04
> 0.06
> 0.08
> 0.10
> K*
> Relative Degree (K*) of Top 20 Human Actors
> Source
> Humans
> GPT
> Haiku

Fig. 4 : Relative degree ( K∗; computed within each group) for the top 20 most central actors found in human transcripts. The corresponding K∗ values for the same set of actors are also provided for both LLM-generated (GPT and Haiku) TEA Networks. For clarity, the pronoun “I” is excluded, as it has the highest relative degree across the three groups: humans ( K∗ = .675), GPT ( K∗ = .639) and Haiku ( K∗ = .835). Actors unique to human transcripts are shown in bold. However, concreteness scores in subject words were significantly different between humans and LLMs (UHumans −GP T = 242 , 918, UHumans −Haiku = 247 , 203, p < . 001). Human patients produced responses with a higher median concreteness score ( M edian Humans = 3 .20) compared to both GPT ( M edian GP T = 2 .76) and Haiku ( M edian Haiku = 2 .70) simulated patients. Furthermore, the inter-quartile range ( IQR ) of the distributions produced by the LLMs was notably narrower ( IQR Haiku = 0 .93, IQR GP T = 0 .93) compared to that observed in the human data ( IQR Humans = 1 .46). These findings are consistent with recent studies showing that LLMs tend to produce generic language that lacks grounding in real-world scenarios (Birhane & McGann, 2024; Pavlick, 2023) and exhibit reduced semantic richness compared to human language (Guo, Shang, & Clavel, 2024). 

3.3.4 Case-Specific Discussion 

Using the TEA Nets framework, we introduce a novel methodology for comparing human and Large Language Model (LLM) responses in the context of machine psychology (Hagendorff, 2023). In the first analysis, we isolated objects (Targets) associated with ”I-feel” networks in both humans and LLMs, comparing 200 texts generated by LLM-simulated clients with 212 counseling-like responses produced by human patients. Using EmoAtlas (Semeraro et al., 2025), we found that both humans and LLMs express significant levels of sadness within ”I-feel-Target” sentences, though LLMs do so with lower intensity, as measured by NRC-EIL (Mohammad, 2018), possibly due to safeguarding mechanisms in AI training that lead to the suppression of extreme expressions of negative emotions (Fazzi et al., 2025). Interestingly, Claude 3’s Haiku showed significant levels of joy, even when simulating a patient with depression, highlighting discrepancies with humans. In the second analysis, we adopted the TEA Nets library to identify actors mentioned in the narratives produced by both humans and LLMs. We subsequently applied the norms from Brysbaert et al. (2014) to compare how concrete these actors were in human and LLM-generated texts and found that models like Claude 3’s Haiku and GPT-3.5 demonstrated a preference for less concrete actors and exhibited 23 less variability in this psycholinguistic dimension compared to humans, suggesting a reduced grounding in real-world scenarios (Birhane & McGann, 2024; Guo et al., 2024).. Overall, these discrepancies in emotional intensity and psycholinguistic features, highlight the current challenges in achieving realistic LLM-enhanced virtual patients (Garc´ ıa-Torres et al., 2024). Nevertheless, when emotional intensity is disregarded, we found alignment in terms of sadness from both humans and LLMs. We believe this alignment underscores the potential for further refinement in AI for mental health. For this reason, we stress the importance of accurate and psychologically informed prompt engineering (Chen et al., 2023) or fine-tuning (R. Wang et al., 2024) to better capture authentic human experiences in future virtual patient simulations. Nevertheless, our results indicating similar expression of emotions in ”I-feel-Target” networks (although often failing to capture their full intensity) suggest some promise for developing AI clients in mental health training. A fine-tuned version of GPT-4 has recently been shown to improve virtual patients’ effectiveness for training purposes compared to baseline models (R. Wang et al., 2024). At the same time, models’ role-playing capabilities are improving (L. Wang et al., 2025), and new approaches using psychologically-informed prompt engineering have helped better mimic the complexity of real-world scenarios (Lozoya et al., 2025). Overall, our findings suggest that the LLM-simulated patients examined here still diverge from human counseling transcripts in emotional intensity and concreteness of actors. These differences should be addressed before such simulations are used as high-fidelity substitutes for human patient interactions in psychother-apy training. TEA Nets revealed marked differences in both emotional intensity and real-world grounding between humans and LLMs, which may reduce the effectiveness of using AI systems in training scenarios. Increasing the realism of LLM-enhanced virtual patients is critical, as immersive role-playing and high-fidelity simulations are known to enhance learning transfer to real clinical settings (Garc´ ıa-Torres et al., 2024; Reger, Norr, Gramlich, & Buchman, 2021). We argue that TEA Nets are particularly valuable for informing prompt engineering for virtual patients. By extracting structured syntactic and semantic information from both human and LLM-generated texts, Target-Event-Agent Networks make it possible to explicitly iden-tify divergences between LLM responses and authentic human conversations. These insights can guide the refinement of prompts to support more realistic and clinically useful future virtual patient interactions. 

# 4 Discussion 

Narratives are central to human cognition, shaping self-understanding, interpersonal perceptions, and event comprehension (McAdams, 2011; Sarbin, 1986). This work introduces the TEA Nets framework as a powerful and novel methodological approach to analyze narratives. A Target-Event-Agent Network can provide an interpretable approximation of how narratives assign agency, actions, and consequences (Reiter-Haas et al., 2024), enabling researchers to study how people assign responsibility and perceive causal relationships (Sheikh et al., 2023). Whereas traditional methods of Natural Language Processing, such as Bag-of-Words, focus on word frequency or co-occurrence, TEA Nets leverage both syntactic and semantic information to automatically construct networks capturing three central narrative components: subjects (Agents), verbs (Events), and objects (Targets). This can be valuable in behavioral and text analysis research. For instance, in a text expressing distress (De Duro et al., 2025), understanding the perceived agent of suffering, the harmful action, and the affected entity can provide specific insights into the user’s psychological state and narrative framing (Abramski et al., 2024). TEA Nets could also be useful for tracking therapeutic progress (Nikzad et al., 2025). In the context of Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder (OCD) treatment, a client’s shift from ”I washed my hands” to ”The OCD made me wash my hands” demonstrates externalization (i.e., viewing symptoms or problems as separate from the self), a key therapeutic goal (Barrett, Farrell, Pina, Peris, & Piacentini, 2008) that TEA Nets can systematically detect and quantify by specifically extracting the subject (and not the object) from transcripts. 24 The Target-Event-Agent Networks framework uniquely captures actors, actions and consequences from large corpora. By doing so, it helps identify semantic and psychological implications within text by providing a clear, structured representation of relationships between key elements in the narrative. Teixeira et al. (2021) showed that personal pronouns like “I” play central roles in suicide notes. In this context, the TEA Nets framework presents an opportunity to extend this analysis by enabling the identification of “I” as subject or object, and integrating emotional valence with its associated actions. Distinguishing the syntactic role of concepts expressed in narratives can be crucial. In psycholinguistics, the grammatical role of concepts (e.g., subject versus object) has been shown to be more influential than mere mention order or salience in pronoun resolution (Hert, J¨ arvikivi, & Arnhold, 2024). Furthermore, Abramski et al. (2024) provided a strong example of why mapping actors, actions, and consequences can be relevant in psychological inquiries. Consider the following two sentences: (i) “I was raped by my uncle” and (ii) “I was raped, while my uncle was watching”. In (i) “uncle” is the perpetrator, while in (ii) “uncle” is a bystander. Traditional cognitive network science approaches do not account for the different roles attributed to “uncle”. In contrast, by systematically extracting actors, actions, and consequences, TEA Nets make it possible to determine whether ”uncle” is linked directly with the action of sexual assault or not, distinguishing between the two cases. Such distinctions allow for the extraction of role-specific semantic frames and better understanding of the emotions tied to ”uncle” in each context. This nuanced differentiation is crucial, as the role of bystanders and perpetrators can have distinct psychological impacts in cases of sexual assault (Labhardt et al., 2025). In order to carry out analyses like the one described above, we have made TEA Nets accessible as a Python package (https://github.com/MassimoStel/TEA Networks). In the following, we discuss TEA Nets in terms of interpretability, case studies, relevant cognitive-science literature, and limitations. 

TEA Nets support interpretable text analysis. A core strength of our framework lies in its inter-pretability. Such interpretability is achieved on two levels: first, through a transparent and explainable process of network construction, and second, by enabling clear, quantitative, and psychologically meaningful analyses of the resulting networks. In the network extraction process, we rely on the AI’s ability to per-form syntactic parsing (using spaCy; (Explosion, 2025)), an important component in the overall process of creating Target-Event-Agent Networks. In this way, artificial intelligence is used to detect structural fea-tures of language rather than to work directly with vector embeddings. Thanks to this difference, TEA Nets provide a more interpretable framework than purely AI-driven approaches for extracting agents, actions, and consequences from unstructured textual data (Cheng et al., 2024). In addition, TEA Nets adopt the VADER sentiment lexicon (Hutto & Gilbert, 2014) to label key elements in narratives with sentiment valence information. By doing so, TEA Nets introduce an affective dimension to the network representation while preserving transparency using a dictionary-based approach (Feuerriegel et al., 2025). The structured output of the Target-Event-Agent Networks framework enables network-based analysis of texts using measures like degree centrality, allowing researchers to gain quantitative, interpretable, and psychologically meaningful insights from narratives (Abramski et al., 2024; Siew et al., 2019; Stella, 2020). Furthermore, TEA Nets support systematic comparisons of linguistic patterns across different categories of texts, allowing researchers to detect and examine subtle yet significant variations in language use. This is particularly important in several psychological fields, including the sensitive domain of mental health (De Choudhury, Pendse, & Kumar, 2023), where language produced by humans can be compared against that of LLMs to gain insights into the limitations and biases of current models. 

Limitations 

Despite their advantages, Target-Event-Agent Networks have limitations. First, TEA Nets are naturally prone to ambiguities that cannot be entirely resolved from text. For instance, our current TEA Nets implementation relies by default on FastCoref for coreference resolution (Otmazgin et al., 2022). We chose FastCoref for its lightweight nature; however, coreference resolution remains an intrinsically challenging task 25 in computational linguistics. Even advanced solvers like FastCoref and Stanza (when used as an alternative; (Qi et al., 2020)) do not consistently achieve high accuracy scores across all contexts. It is important to note, however, that the modular architecture of the TEA Nets Python implementation allows for future upgrades: as improved coreference resolution techniques are developed, they can be readily integrated into the library. A second limitation arises when applying TEA Nets to data extracted from spoken interactions, such as ther-apist transcripts. This speech-to-text process necessarily leads to the loss of prosodic features such as tone, pitch, and rhythm, which may convey crucial linguistic information. Consequently, text-based analyses are inherently limited in their capacity to capture elements such as sarcasm or emotional nuance (Semeraro et al., 2025), which often rely on intonation and other non-textual cues. Researchers should therefore interpret findings in light of this limitation, emphasizing the semantic and syntactic content that is reliably accessible through text analysis. The third limitation, also shared with textual forma mentis networks (Stella, 2022), stems from the use of a dictionary-based lexicon to annotate the nodes with negative, neutral, or positive valence. Here, we chose VADER (Hutto & Gilbert, 2014) for sentiment analysis because of its transparency and generally strong performance. However, words mentioned in a specific context might undergo shifts in their meaning (e.g., ”sick” as a negative descriptor in everyday speech versus a positive slang term), poten-tionally leading to misclassified sentiment. For this reason, researchers are encouraged to interpret concepts within the broader framework of their relational networks, rather than considering them in isolation, to avoid drawing misleading conclusions. A further limitation is that Subject–Verb–Object units mostly correspond to individual concepts or periphrases. As a result, the system may struggle to accurately represent more com-plex sentence structures, particularly nested or hierarchical clauses. This limitation is partly mitigated by the use of hypergraphs (Citraro et al., 2023), so that individual nodes in networks can be whole sentences or subgraphs rather than isolated words. Last but not least, TEA Nets currently supports only English. Since Scandinavian languages share the same SVO structure of English (Holmberg & Rijkhoff, 1998), TEA Nets could be potentially expanded to other non-English languages while being careful about passive form con-struction. However, this extension depends on the availability of future libraries supporting SVO detection in non-English languages. 

# 5 Conclusion 

In this work, we introduced the TEA Nets framework as an innovative computational tool, grounded in cognitive network science, Natural Language Processing, and Artificial Intelligence. TEA Nets are specifi-cally designed to extract and represent actors, actions and consequences from textual data. We implemented this framework as an open-source Python library to support its practical use in psychological and multi-disciplinary research settings. We provide a comprehensive description of the processing pipeline, detailing how unstructured text inputs are systematically transformed into structured TEA Nets representations. We showcase three practical implementations of the TEA Nets Python library across conspiracy narratives, online sexual-assault narratives, and counseling transcripts involving human and LLM-simulated patients. These applications demonstrate that the TEA Nets framework offers a granular, interpretable, and powerful approach for analyzing relational dynamics in language. By complementing existing text analysis methods, the TEA Nets framework opens new avenues for research in behavioral and social sciences. 

# 6 Acknowledgments 

This work was supported by the contribution of the Ministero Dell’Universit` a e della Ricerca (MUR) accord-ing to Decreto N. 23178 of 10 dicembre 2024 - Bando FIS 2. The authors acknowledge support from CALCOLO, funded by Fondazione VRT, for support with the computational infrastructure simulating LLMs. We acknowledge Salvatore Citraro for valuable feedback on a preliminary version of this manuscript. 26 References 

Abramski, K., Ciringione, L., Rossetti, G., Stella, M. (2024). Voices of rape: Cognitive networks link passive voice usage to psychological distress in online narratives. Computers in Human Behavior , 158 , 108266, Aeschbach, S., Mata, R., Wulff, D.U. (2025). Measuring individual semantic networks: A simulation study. 

PLoS One , 20 (8), e0328712, Aitchison, J. (2012). Words in the mind: An introduction to the mental lexicon . John Wiley & Sons. Barrett, P.M., Farrell, L., Pina, A.A., Peris, T.S., Piacentini, J. (2008). Evidence-based psychosocial treat-ments for child and adolescent obsessive–compulsive disorder. Journal of Clinical Child & Adolescent Psychology , 37 (1), 131–155, Basile, K.C., Smith, S.G., Kresnow, M.-j., Khatiwada, S., Leemis, R.W. (2022). The national intimate partner and sexual violence survey: 2016/2017 report on sexual violence. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (US) , , Basile, P., Musacchio, E., Polignano, M., Siciliani, L., Fiameni, G., Semeraro, G. (2023). Llamantino: Llama 2 models for effective text generation in italian language. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.09993 , , Binz, M., & Schulz, E. (2023). Using cognitive psychology to understand gpt-3. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 120 (6), e2218523120, Birhane, A., & McGann, M. (2024). Large models of what? mistaking engineering achievements for human linguistic agency. Language Sciences , 106 , 101672, Bohner, G. (2001). Writing about rape: Use of the passive voice and other distancing text features as an expression of perceived responsibility of the victim. British Journal of Social Psychology , 40 (4), 515–529, Boyd, R.L., Ashokkumar, A., Seraj, S., Pennebaker, J.W. (2022a). The development and psychometric properties of liwc-22. Austin, TX: University of Texas at Austin. Retrieved from https://www.liwc.app Boyd, R.L., Ashokkumar, A., Seraj, S., Pennebaker, J.W. (2022b). The development and psychometric properties of liwc-22. Austin, TX: University of Texas at Austin , 10 , 1–47, Brysbaert, M., Warriner, A.B., Kuperman, V. (2014). Concreteness ratings for 40 thousand generally known english word lemmas. Behavior research methods , 46 , 904–911, 27 Carrillo, A., Roske, S.F., Ianov-Vitanov, R., Perinelli, E., Grecucci, A., Stella, M. (2025). Textual forma men-tis networks bridge language structure, emotional content and psychopathology levels in adolescents. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.06387 , , Chen, S., Wu, M., Zhu, K.Q., Lan, K., Zhang, Z., Cui, L. (2023). Llm-empowered chatbots for psychiatrist and patient simulation: application and evaluation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.13614 , , Cheng, N., Yan, Z., Wang, Z., Li, Z., Yu, J., Zheng, Z., . . . Han, W. (2024). Potential and limitations of llms in capturing structured semantics: A case study on srl. International conference on intelligent computing (pp. 50–61). Citraro, S., Warner-Willich, J., Battiston, F., Siew, C.S., Rossetti, G., Stella, M. (2023). Hypergraph models of the mental lexicon capture greater information than pairwise networks for predicting language learning. New Ideas in Psychology , 71 , 101034, Conway, M.A., & Pleydell-Pearce, C.W. (2000). The construction of autobiographical memories in the self-memory system. Psychological review , 107 (2), 261, De Choudhury, M., Pendse, S.R., Kumar, N. (2023). Benefits and harms of large language models in digital mental health. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.14693 , , De Duro, E.S., Improta, R., Stella, M. (2024). Network science highlights the emotional structure of counselling conversations simulated by large language models and humans. Proceedings of the 28th workshop on the semantics and pragmatics of dialogue. 

De Duro, E.S., Improta, R., Stella, M. (2025). Introducing counsellme: A dataset of simulated mental health dialogues for comparing llms like haiku, llamantino and chatgpt against humans. Emerging Trends in Drugs, Addictions, and Health , 100170, Detroja, K., Bhensdadia, C., Bhatt, B.S. (2023). A survey on relation extraction. Intelligent Systems with Applications , 19 , 200244, Devlin, J., Chang, M.-W., Lee, K., Toutanova, K. (2019). Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding. Proceedings of the 2019 conference of the north american chapter of the association for computational linguistics: human language technologies, volume 1 (long and short papers) (pp. 4171–4186). D´ oczi, B. (2019). An overview of conceptual models and theories of lexical representation in the mental lexicon. The Routledge handbook of vocabulary studies , 46–65, Doell, K. (2013). The word feel as an indicator of enacted social support in personal relationships. 

International Journal of Psychological Studies , 5 (4), 107, 28 Edwards, T., & Holtzman, N.S. (2017). A meta-analysis of correlations between depression and first person singular pronoun use. Journal of Research in Personality , 68 , 63–68, Explosion (2025). spaCy: Industrial-strength natural language processing in python. https://spacy.io/. (Accessed April 23, 2025) Fazzi, G.F., Skoven Hinge, J., Heinrich, S., Burelli, P. (2025). Don’t get too excited-eliciting emotions in llms. Proceedings of the extended abstracts of the chi conference on human factors in computing systems (pp. 1–9). Feder, A., Keith, K.A., Manzoor, E., Pryzant, R., Sridhar, D., Wood-Doughty, Z., . . . others (2022). Causal inference in natural language processing: Estimation, prediction, interpretation and beyond. 

Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics , 10 , 1138–1158, Feuerriegel, S., Maarouf, A., B¨ ar, D., Geissler, D., Schweisthal, J., Pr¨ ollochs, N., . . . others (2025). Using natural language processing to analyse text data in behavioural science. Nature Reviews Psychology ,1–16, Fong, A., Roozenbeek, J., Goldwert, D., Rathje, S., Van Der Linden, S. (2021). The language of conspiracy: A psychological analysis of speech used by conspiracy theorists and their followers on twitter. Group Processes & Intergroup Relations , 24 (4), 606–623, Gagliardi, L. (2025). The role of cognitive biases in conspiracy beliefs: A literature review. Journal of Economic Surveys , 39 (1), 32–65, Gambini, M., Tardelli, S., Tesconi, M. (2024). The anatomy of conspiracy theorists: unveiling traits using a comprehensive twitter dataset. Computer Communications , 217 , 25–40, Garc´ ıa-Torres, D., Vicente Ripoll, M.A., Fern´ andez Peris, C., Mira Solves, J.J. (2024). Enhancing clinical reasoning with virtual patients: A hybrid systematic review combining human reviewers and chatgpt. 

Healthcare (Vol. 12, p. 2241). Giachanou, A., Ghanem, B., Rosso, P. (2023). Detection of conspiracy propagators using psycho-linguistic characteristics. Journal of Information Science , 49 (1), 3–17, Gollob, H.F. (1974). The subject-verb-object approach to social cognition. Psychological Review , 81 (4), 286, Greenberg, J.H., et al. (1963). Some universals of grammar with particular reference to the order of meaningful elements. Universals of language , 2 , 73–113, 29 Guo, Y., Shang, G., Clavel, C. (2024). Benchmarking linguistic diversity of large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.10271 , , Hagberg, A.A., Schult, D.A., Swart, P.J. (2008). Exploring network structure, dynamics, and function using networkx. G. Varoquaux, T. Vaught, & J. Millman (Eds.), Proceedings of the 7th python in science conference (p. 11 - 15). Pasadena, CA USA. Hagendorff, T. (2023). Machine psychology: Investigating emergent capabilities and behavior in large language models using psychological methods. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.13988 , 1 , , Haim, E., Fischer, N., Citraro, S., Rossetti, G., Stella, M. (2026). Forma mentis networks predict creativity ratings of short texts via interpretable artificial intelligence in human and ai-simulated raters. Journal of Computational Social Science , 9 (1), 22, Haim, E., & Stella, M. (2026). Cognitive networks for knowledge modeling: A gentle introduction for data-and cognitive scientists. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Cognitive Science , 17 (2), e70026, Harnad, S. (2017). To cognize is to categorize: cognition is categorization. Handbook of categorization in cognitive science (pp. 21–54). Elsevier. Hert, R., J¨ arvikivi, J., Arnhold, A. (2024). The importance of linguistic factors: He likes subject referents. 

Cognitive Science , 48 (4), e13436, Hills, T.T. (2024). Behavioral network science: Language, mind, and society . Cambridge University Press. Hills, T.T., & Kenett, Y.N. (2022). Is the mind a network? maps, vehicles, and skyhooks in cognitive network science. Topics in Cognitive Science , 14 (1), 189–208, Holmberg, A., & Rijkhoff, J. (1998). Word order in the germanic languages. EMPIRICAL APPROACHES TO LANGUAGE TYPOLOGY , 20 , 75–104, Huang, J.-t., Lam, M.H., Li, E.J., Ren, S., Wang, W., Jiao, W., . . . Lyu, M.R. (2024). Apathetic or empathetic? evaluating llms’ emotional alignments with humans. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 37 , 97053–97087, Hutto, C., & Gilbert, E. (2014). Vader: A parsimonious rule-based model for sentiment analysis of social media text. Proceedings of the international aaai conference on web and social media (Vol. 8, pp. 216–225). Jaeger, J., Lindblom, K.M., Parker-Guilbert, K., Zoellner, L.A. (2014). Trauma narratives: It’s what you say, not how you say it. Psychological Trauma: Theory, Research, Practice, and Policy , 6 (5), 473, 30 Kenett, Y.N., & Hills, T.T. (2022). Editors’ introduction to networks of the mind: How can network science elucidate our understanding of cognition? (Vol. 14) (No. 1). Wiley Online Library. Klein, C., Clutton, P., Polito, V. (2018). Topic modeling reveals distinct interests within an online conspiracy forum. Frontiers in psychology , 9 , 189, Labhardt, D., McKillop, N., Holdsworth, E., Brown, S., Howat, D., Jones, C. (2025). To intervene or not to intervene: An experimental methodology measuring actual bystander behaviour. Behavioral Sciences ,

15 (4), 550, Li, H., Chong, Y.Q., Stepputtis, S., Campbell, J., Hughes, D., Lewis, M., Sycara, K. (2023). Theory of mind for multi-agent collaboration via large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.10701 , , Li, Y., Zeng, C., Zhong, J., Zhang, R., Zhang, M., Zou, L. (2024). Leveraging large language model as simulated patients for clinical education. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.13066 , , Lozoya, D., Conway, M., De Duro, E., D’Alfonso, S. (2025, June 5). Leveraging Large Language Models for Simulated Psychotherapy Client Interactions: Development and Usability Study of Client101. JMIR Medical Education , –(–), e68056, https://doi.org/10.2196/68056 (Forthcoming / in press) Malhotra, G., Waheed, A., Srivastava, A., Akhtar, M.S., Chakraborty, T. (2022). Speaker and time-aware joint contextual learning for dialogue-act classification in counselling conversations. Proceedings of the fifteenth acm international conference on web search and data mining (pp. 735–745). McAdams, D.P. (2011). Narrative identity. Handbook of identity theory and research (pp. 99–115). Springer. Menezes, T., & Roth, C. (2019). Semantic hypergraphs. arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.10784 , , Miani, A., Hills, T., Bangerter, A. (2022). Loco: The 88-million-word language of conspiracy corpus. Behavior research methods , 54 (4), 1794–1817, Mikolov, T., Chen, K., Corrado, G., Dean, J. (2013). Efficient estimation of word representations in vector space. arXiv preprint arXiv:1301.3781 , , Miller, G.A. (1995). Wordnet: a lexical database for english. Communications of the ACM , 38 (11), 39–41, Mohammad, S.M. (2018). Word affect intensities. Proceedings of the 11th edition of the language resources and evaluation conference (lrec-2018). Miyazaki, Japan. Newman, M. (2018). Networks: An introduction . London (UK): Oxford University Press. 31 Nikzad, A.H., Lysaker, P.H., Minor, K.S., Leonhardt, B., Liberman, M.Y., Vohs, J., . . . Tang, S.X. (2025). Evolution of linguistic markers of agency, centrality and content during metacognitive therapy for psychosis: A pilot exploratory study. Early Intervention in Psychiatry , 19 (1), e13628, O’Neill, T. (2018). ‘today i speak’: Exploring how victim-survivors use reddit. International journal for crime, justice and social democracy , 7 (1), 44–59, Otmazgin, S., Cattan, A., Goldberg, Y. (2022). F-coref: Fast, accurate and easy to use coreference resolution. 

Aacl. 

Pavlick, E. (2023). Symbols and grounding in large language models. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A , 381 (2251), 20220041, Peluso, P.R., & Freund, R.R. (2018). Therapist and client emotional expression and psychotherapy outcomes: A meta-analysis. Psychotherapy , 55 (4), 461, Pennebaker, J.W., Francis, M.E., Booth, R.J. (2001). Linguistic inquiry and word count: Liwc 2001. Mahway: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , 71 (2001), 2001, Qi, P., Zhang, Y., Zhang, Y., Bolton, J., Manning, C.D. (2020). Stanza: A python natural language processing toolkit for many human languages. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.07082 , , Rahwan, I., Cebrian, M., Obradovich, N., Bongard, J., Bonnefon, J.-F., Breazeal, C., . . . others (2019). Machine behaviour. Nature , 568 (7753), 477–486, Recordare, A., Cola, G., Fagni, T., Tesconi, M. (2024). Unveiling online conspiracy theorists: a text-based approach and characterization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.12566 , , Reger, G.M., Norr, A.M., Gramlich, M.A., Buchman, J.M. (2021). Virtual standardized patients for mental health education. Current psychiatry reports , 23 (9), 57, Reiter-Haas, M., Kl¨ osch, B., Hadler, M., Lex, E. (2024). Framing analysis of health-related narratives: Conspiracy versus mainstream media. Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.10030 Rogers, C. (2012). Client centered therapy (new ed) . Hachette UK. Rudin, C. (2019). Stop explaining black box machine learning models for high stakes decisions and use interpretable models instead. Nature machine intelligence , 1 (5), 206–215, Sarbin, T.R. (1986). Narrative psychology: The storied nature of human conduct . Bloomsbury Publishing. 32 Semeraro, A., Vilella, S., Improta, R., De Duro, E.S., Mohammad, S.M., Ruffo, G., Stella, M. (2025). Emoat-las: An emotional network analyzer of texts that merges psychological lexicons, artificial intelligence, and network science. Behavior Research Methods , 57 (2), 77, Semeraro, A., Vilella, S., Ruffo, G., Stella, M. (2022). Emotional profiling and cognitive networks unravel how mainstream and alternative press framed astrazeneca, pfizer and covid-19 vaccination campaigns. 

Scientific reports , 12 (1), 14445, Sepehri, A., Mirshafiee, M.S., Markowitz, D.M. (2023). Passivepy: A tool to automatically identify passive voice in big text data. Journal of Consumer Psychology , 33 (4), 714–727, Sheikh, S.J., Haider, S., Levis, A.H. (2023). On semi-automated extraction of causal networks from raw text. Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence , 123 , 106189, Siew, C.S., Wulff, D.U., Beckage, N.M., Kenett, Y.N. (2019). Cognitive network science: A review of research on cognition through the lens of network representations, processes, and dynamics. Complexity ,

2019 (1), 2108423, Stella, M. (2020). Text-mining forma mentis networks reconstruct public perception of the stem gender gap in social media. PeerJ Computer Science , 6 , e295, Stella, M. (2022). Cognitive network science for understanding online social cognitions: A brief review. 

Topics in Cognitive Science , 14 (1), 143–162, Stella, M., Citraro, S., Rossetti, G., Marinazzo, D., Kenett, Y.N., Vitevitch, M.S. (2024). Cognitive mod-elling of concepts in the mental lexicon with multilayer networks: Insights, advancements, and future challenges. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review , 1–24, Teixeira, A.S., Talaga, S., Swanson, T.J., Stella, M. (2021). Revealing semantic and emotional structure of suicide notes with cognitive network science. Scientific reports , 11 (1), 19423, Van Staden, C., & Fulford, K. (2004). Changes in semantic uses of first person pronouns as possible linguistic markers of recovery in psychotherapy. Australian & New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry ,

38 (4), 226–232, Vitevitch, M.S. (2022). What can network science tell us about phonology and language processing? Topics in Cognitive Science , 14 (1), 127–142, 33 Wang, L., Lian, J., Huang, Y., Dai, Y., Li, H., Chen, X., . . . Wen, J.-R. (2025). Characterbox: Evaluating the role-playing capabilities of llms in text-based virtual worlds. Proceedings of the 2025 conference of the nations of the americas chapter of the association for computational linguistics: Human language technologies (volume 1: Long papers) (pp. 6372–6391). Wang, R., Milani, S., Chiu, J.C., Zhi, J., Eack, S.M., Labrum, T., . . . others (2024). Patient-{\ Psi }: Using large language models to simulate patients for training mental health professionals. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.19660 , , 

# A Supplementary Information 

# A.1 Python Library: teanets 

The TEA conceptual framework is implemented as an open-source Python library, publicly available at https://github.com/MassimoStel/TEA Networks (Accessed 28/04/2026): teanets . This library provides a suite of computational tools that enable researchers to apply the TEA methodology to textual analysis. The library employs a modular design that separates the analysis pipeline into distinct, function-specific compo-nents. These key components, detailed below, enable textual analysis within the framework: (i) textloader ;(ii) nlp utils ; (iii) svo extraction ; (iv) svo to graph and network analysis; (v) teanets.analytics ; (vi) 

resources .The textloader module handles text cleaning and coreferencing. The library supports integration with the FastCoref coreference solver (Otmazgin et al., 2022) (or alternatively, with Stanza ; (Qi et al., 2020)). The nlp utils.py module provides NLP utilities, including text processing via spaCy’s NLP pipeline, accessible through the spacynlp function. This module also incorporates sentiment analysis. The 

compute valence function, using the VADER module (Hutto & Gilbert, 2014), measures the emotional valence of textual data at the level of each node. The resulting valence scores can be used to annotate graph nodes with sentiment labels. The svo extraction.py module is responsible for extracting Subject-Verb-Objects triples (SVOs) from texts that have been syntactically parsed with spaCy . Using helper functions such as get verb subjects ,

get verb objects , and get verb phrase this module identifies the key components of SVOs. Furthermore, 

svo extraction.py identifies semantic relationships by checking for synonymy between words within the same syntactic roles (layers), using WordNet (Miller, 1995) via the are synonymous function. Beyond data extraction, the library offers tools for analysis and visualization. It enables the construc-tion of NetworkX graphs (Hagberg, Schult, & Swart, 2008) from SVOs via the svo to graph function. Nodes are typed according to their syntactic role: subject, verb, or object, corresponding to the TEA roles Agent, Event, and Target. Edges within the network can represent both syntactic and semantic relation-ships. The svo to graph function includes options for filtering and sentiment-based colour-coding. Thanks to filter svo dataframe by tea , it is possible to filter the SVOs based on the TEA role. Users can also calculate weighted degree centrality for specific roles via tea weighted degree centrality , and obtain an overview of central nodes with tea degree centrality overview .The teanets.analytics module provides comprehensive tools for manipulation and export of TEAs. Among its utility functions are merge svo dataframes , which facilitates the merging of multiple DataFrame objects, and export hypergraphs , which enables the export of syntactic hypergraphs. In addition, the module provides functionality for saving data in CSV format. 34 Finally, the resources module houses essential internal resources, including various resource files utilized internally by the pipeline, such as specific word lists used for coreference resolution or for determin-ing sentiment valence. These resources support the internal operations of the pipeline and facilitate the implementation of key functionalities. 

# A.2 Guide for the TEA code implementation 

This section provides a step-by-step guide to using the teanets Python library in a Google Colab notebook for extracting SVOs and visualizing TEAs. Readers can try it directly here. 

Fig. S1 : Snippet of the Python code demonstrating the process of SVO triplet extraction and TEA generation from a sample text using the teanets library. The output showcases the tabular SVO DataFrame .Figure S1 displays a minimal working example of using the teanets package, following four simple steps: 1. Install the Target-Event-Agent Networks Library. The first command of the code snippet installs the library by running !pip install -q git+https://github.com/MassimoStel/TEA Networks . This command executes a shell command in the Colab environment, installing the teanets library directly from its GitHub repository. 2. Load Necessary Modules. The following two commands ( import teanets as tea and import teanets.analytics ) import the main teanets library and the analytics submodule, respectively. These imports make the functions defined within the modules accessible for use in the notebook, and they ensure that all functions and methods defined within these modules are available for use throughout the current notebook. 35 3. Extract SVOs from Text. The next command defines a text string, assigned to the text variable (see Figure 1A). The tea.extract svos from text(text) function processes this text to extract SVOs that encode the TEA Nets relationships within the sentences. The display(svo) command outputs the extracted SVOs as a pandas DataFrame (see Figure 1D). 4. Plot the TEA Network. The final command ( tea.plot svo graph(svo, custom font = 20) ) takes the extracted svo DataFrame and plots it as a Target-Event-Agent Network graph, as presented in Figure 1E. The custom font = 20 argument adjusts the font size for improved readability of the node labels in the generated plot. 

A.2.1 Supplementary and Advanced Guides 

To support researchers in applying and verifying the TEA framework, the Docs & Guides folder contains the complete suite of interactive notebooks: – Starting Guide (Starting Guide.ipynb ): An extended overview of the pipeline architecture and configuration. – Analyzing TEA (Analyzing TEA.ipynb ): Focuses on computing network metrics and analyzing the emotional valence of nodes. – Actor Categorization (Actor Categorization Tutorial.ipynb ): Shows how to group semantic agents into broader thematic categories for high-level analysis. – Generating TEA Figures (Generating TEA Figures.ipynb ): Provides a step-by-step tutorial on how to generate and export the Target-Event-Agent network visual representations used in the repository documentation. 36 A.3 GPT’s ”I-feel-Target” structures and emotional flower 

Fig. S2 : Top 20 most frequent objects (“Targets”) associated with the “I-feel” subject-verb pair in GPT-3.5 transcripts. 

# A.4 Actor concreteness 

To compute the concreteness scores for each unique actor extracted from TEA, we employed the word concreteness norms developed by Brysbaert et al. (2014), which provide concreteness ratings for a large set of English words. We create one list entry for each word (e.g., [”big argument”] becomes [”big”], [”argument”]). We then take the set of actors from this list and assign a concreteness score to each element of the set using the dictionary form Brysbaert et al. (2014). Finally, we compared the resulting concreteness score distributions using the Mann–Whitney U test implemented in scipy.stats.mannwhitneyu in Python. 

# A.5 Target-Event-Agent edges in conspiracy narratives 

Table 7 presents the frequencies of the top 20 “Agent-Event” and “Event-Target” edges for both high-conspiracy and low-similarity conspiracy documents. All frequency values are presented in thousands. 37 Table 7 : Edge Frequency ( EdF ) of the top 20 “Agent-Event” and “Event-Target” edges in high- and low-similarity conspiracy documents. Values are expressed in thousands. 

Conspiracy Low-similarity Conspiracy Who Did EdF Did What EdF Who Did EdF Did What EdF it be 12.85 be what 3.27 it be 1.11 be what 0.22 that be 6.89 do what 1.75 this be 0.48 be likely 0.22 this be 5.75 be able 1.43 that be 0.45 be able 0.20 I be 4.77 circulate 1 today 1.35 you see 0.20 be back free shipping 0.18 we be 3.75 circulate 1 in kremlin 1.35 you be 0.20 be back at % 0.18 you be 3.29 be part 1.30 we be 0.17 be back with 2 0.18 I think 2.32 be true 1.16 Info 3 be back 0.17 be part 0.17 we have 2.24 be who 0.88 I be 0.17 take place 0.10 you see 2.16 say what 0.88 which be 0.14 be high 0.14 you let 1.71 take place 0.77 you can follow 0.12 can follow any response 0.12 I know 1.65 tell I 0.75 platinum 4 be back 0.12 order today today 0.12 I have 1.57 be in fact 0.72 you order today 0.12 be safe 0.12 you know 1.49 be right 0.67 this entry file 0.12 order today free shipping 0.12 we know 1.46 tell we 0.66 this entry post 0.12 order today vitamin 5 0.12 you have 1.42 know what 0.60 you check 0.11 say in statement 0.12 what be 1.37 call what 0.59 you have 0.11 order today with 2 0.12 what happen 1.33 be 0.58 you read 0.11 order today at % 0.12 I believe 1.23 be time 0.57 you note 0.11 be responsible 0.12 people be 1.21 be responsible 0.55 study publish 0.10 be important 0.11 I say 1.20 be possible 0.51 fluoride be 0.10 can follow through 6 0.09  

> 1

circulate today  

> 2

with double Patriot Points  

> 3

Infowars Life Lung Cleanse Plus  

> 4

platinum standard  

> 5

Vitamin Mineral Fusion  

> 6

through rss feed 

Analysis of top “Agent-Event” edge frequencies in high-conspiracy documents reveals a prominent role for first and second-person pronouns (“I”, “we”, “you”), often coupled with cognitive verbs (e.g., “think” and “believe”). To provide a more comprehensive picture, we extended the analysis to the top 100 edges; however, Although Table 7 reports only the top 20, the extended analysis shows pattern where these pronouns most often pair with verbs such as “think”, “do”, “believe”, “get”, “make”, and “find”. These verb pairings suggest distinct narrative functions. Connections involving verbs like “think” and “believe” relate to cognitive processes and belief formation. Verbs such as “do”, “get”, “make”, and “find” imply a focus on actions and agency within the narrative. Notably, the verbs “be”, “have”, “know”, and “see” also show frequent connections with “I”, “we”, and “you”. However, we did not interpret their implications for conspiracy narratives because they appear with equally high edge frequencies in low-similarity conspiracy documents. 38