Title: Building to Understand: Examining Teens' Technical and Socio-Ethical Pieces of Understandings in the Construction of Small Generative Language Models

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.25852v1

Published Time: Mon, 30 Mar 2026 00:11:14 GMT

Number of Pages: 28

Markdown Content:
# Building to Understand: Examining Teens’ Technical and Socio-Ethical Pieces of Understandings in the Construction of Small Generative Language Models 

## LUIS MORALES-NAVARRO, University of Pennsylvania, USA 

## DANIEL J. NOH, University of Pennsylvania, USA 

## LUCIANNE SERVAT, University of Pennsylvania, USA 

## CARLY NETTING, The Franklin Institute, USA 

## YASMIN B. KAFAI, University of Pennsylvania, USA 

## DANAÉ METAXA, University of Pennsylvania, USA 

The rising adoption of generative AI/ML technologies increases the need to support teens in developing AI/ML literacies. Child-computer interaction research argues that construction activities can support young people in understanding these systems and their implications. Recent exploratory studies demonstrate the feasibility of engaging teens in the construction of very small generative language models (LMs). However, it is unclear how constructing such models may foster the development of teens’ understanding of these systems from technical and socio-ethical perspectives. We conducted a week-long participatory design workshop in which sixteen teenagers constructed very small LMs to generate recipes, screenplays, and songs. Using thematic analysis, we identified technical and socio-ethical pieces of understandings that teens exhibited while designing generative LMs. This paper contributes (a) evidence of the kinds of pieces of understandings that teens have when constructing LMs and (b) a theory-backed framing to study novices’ understandings of AI/ML systems. CCS Concepts: • Human-centered computing → Empirical studies in HCI ; • Social and professional topics → Computing literacy ; K-12 education .Additional Key Words and Phrases: AI literacy, language models, teens, LLMs, computational empowerment, understanding, sense-making, ethics, knowledge-in-pieces, artificial intelligence, machine learning 

ACM Reference Format: 

Luis Morales-Navarro, Daniel J. Noh, Lucianne Servat, Carly Netting, Yasmin B. Kafai, and Danaé Metaxa. 2026. Building to Understand: Examining Teens’ Technical and Socio-Ethical Pieces of Understandings in the Construction of Small Generative Language Models. In 

Proceedings of Interaction Design and Children (IDC ’26). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 28 pages. https://doi.org/XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX 

1 Introduction 

The widespread adoption of generative AI/ML technologies has increased the urgent need for supporting young people in developing AI/ML literacies [ 44 , 78 ]. Recent frameworks highlight that AI/ML literacies involve four domains: 

Authors’ Contact Information: Luis Morales-Navarro, luismn@upenn.edu, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA; Daniel J. Noh, dnoh@upenn.edu, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA; Lucianne Servat, lucianne@upenn.edu, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA; Carly Netting, cnetting@fi.edu, The Franklin Institute, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA; Yasmin B. Kafai, kafai@ upenn.edu, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA; Danaé Metaxa, metaxa@upenn.edu, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA. Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org. 

© 2026 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM. Manuscript submitted to ACM Manuscript submitted to ACM 1

> arXiv:2603.25852v1 [cs.HC] 26 Mar 2026

2 Morales-Navarro et al. engaging with (recognizing, using and evaluating the outcomes of AI/ML systems), creating with (using AI/ML in creative and problem-solving processes), managing (deciding and overseeing which tasks should be assigned to AI systems), and designing AI/ML (designing AI/ML systems to understand how these work) [ 54 ]. Yet, much of the emphasis in AI/ML literacy efforts has centered on preparing young people to use these systems, with less attention to their participation in designing or building them. For example, research conducted on teens’ understanding of generative language models (LMs), such as ChatGPT, has commonly focused on their everyday interactions as users of systems [ 46 , 74 ]. However, within child-computer interaction (CCI), computational empowerment researchers argue that engaging young people in design activities is critical, as learners can develop their agency and build a deeper understanding of sociotechnical systems through the construction of artifacts [ 18 ]. Here, designing AI/ML involves understanding the design decisions that shape model behaviors, that systems make predictions based on data, collecting and curating data to train models, evaluating the outputs of a system, and considering the systems’ potential impact and limitations [ 54 ]. Recent exploratory studies have demonstrated that it is indeed feasible to engage teens in the construction of very small generative LMs [ 51 , 62 ]. Considering the exploratory nature of prior studies, however, more research is needed to determine how such construction activities, in which teens take on the role of designers , may foster or support teens’ understanding of LMs. Thus, this paper presents an investigation of teenagers’ engagement with the construction of very small LMs, focusing on how designing these systems supports their understandings of such systems. Additionally, studies of teens’ understanding of LMs from the perspective of users have investigated the technical and functional understandings young people have of how models work [ 46 ] and their socio-ethical stances 1 towards these systems [ 74 ] separately. However, technical and socio-ethical issues of machine learning are closely intertwined [63 ]. As such, there is a critical need to explore how learners’ technical and socio-ethical understandings intersect. To do so, we propose an in-pieces approach to study novices’ understandings of AI/ML systems. Specifically, in this paper, we build on prior research on knowledge-in-pieces [19], ideology-in-pieces [61], and folk algorithmic theories [16] to propose an in-pieces approach to study technical and socio-ethical understandings in tandem. An in-pieces framing can reveal how learners draw on diverse and fragmented ideas when reasoning about AI/ML systems and how technical and socio-ethical pieces of understandings emerge unevenly in practice. We conducted a participatory design workshop with sixteen 14-15-year-old teens enrolled in a four-year after-school program at a science center in the Northeastern United States. During the workshop, we took a data-driven approach to AI/ML education that glassboxes how data shapes model performance and blackboxes the role of learning algorithms in the ML pipeline [ 21 , 55 ]. Teens iteratively built small datasets (22-230K tokens) to train LMs using the nanoGPT framework [36]. Using thematic analysis, we address the following research question: What socio-ethical and technical pieces of understanding do teens exhibit in-the-moment as they design generative LMs? 

Our analysis shows that socio-ethical and technical pieces of understanding were often connected to each other, sometimes divergent, and highly influenced by contextual aspects. This paper contributes (a) evidence of the kinds of understandings that teens have when constructing very small generative LMs; (b) a theory-backed framing to study novices’ fragmented, unstable understanding of AI/ML systems; and (c) directions for future designs and research to foster teens’ understanding of LMs. 

> 1Those related to teens’ understandings of ethics, values, social norms and the social implications of AI/ML systems [4, 73]. Manuscript submitted to ACM

Building to Understand 3

2 Background 

Here, we situate our work within efforts in CCI that engage young people in the construction of generative LMs, highlighting the need for evidence of the kinds of understandings that young people have when they participate in such construction activities. Following, we frame model building as a sociotechnical activity that requires both technical and socio-ethical understandings. Then, we review how prior research has approached young people’s understandings of AI/ML. And finally, we propose an in-pieces approach that can be used to study both technical and socio-ethical understandings of LMs. 

2.1 Engaging Young People in the Construction of Generative Language Models 

CCI research on computational empowerment (CE) emphasizes that learning about computing should go beyond understanding the technical mechanisms, shifting the focus from solely learning technical skills to providing learners opportunities to participate in the development of computing systems that are relevant to their everyday lives [ 18 , 33 ]. CE centers on construction and deconstruction participatory design activities in which learners are “protagonists” [ 72 ], or where learners are the “main agents” in designing and evaluating systems [ 32 ]. In this paper, we focus on the construction (that is, the design of) small generative LMs. CE researchers conjecture that through construction activities, learners develop deeper understandings of technology and its broader implications [ 32 ]. Traditionally, it is assumed that construction activities are limited to learning about technical aspects of designing computing systems. However, as Iivari et al . [31] demonstrated, construction also involves critically analyzing design ideas and considering socio-ethical implications. Involving young people as designers of AI/ML systems has a long history going back to symbolic AI research in the 1970s, but it is only over the past decade that studies in CCI and computing education have investigated how young people can be engaged in the design of ML models through a data-driven approach [ 22 , 35 ]. This approach glassboxes, or makes transparent, how data shapes model performance by having learners build datasets to train models and blackboxes the role of learning algorithms in the AI/ML pipeline [ 82 ]. In recent studies with data-driven approaches, participants create small datasets that can be easily and quickly refined to train models and improve performance [6, 80 , 90 ]. Such research has also been extended to natural language processing, in which teens label semantic data and train classifiers [ 20 , 29 , 37 , 53 ]. To our knowledge, little research has been conducted on how teens and children engage in building generative LMs. In the past year, researchers have turned their attention to small LMs, running exploratory studies and creating tool prototypes to engage learners in the construction of generative models [ 5 , 12 , 51 , 62 ]. For example, Connelly et al . [12] introduced the Engine Room, a collection of paper- and web-based tools for learners to create LMs using Markov chains. This tool was successfully integrated into language arts courses where teachers scaffolded students to discuss and reflect on the differences between human writing and generative LMs [ 5]. In a different study, Morales-Navarro et al . [51] conducted participatory design sessions with teenagers in which they designed babyGPTs, or very small LMs, using the nanoGPT framework to generate screenplays. Through the design process, participants engaged with key AI/ML data practices (quality control, preparing data, implementing solutions) and ethical issues (copyright, environmental impact, misinformation). Pope and Tedre [62] proposed a teachable machine for LMs that enables novices to train small LMs in the browser. While these exploratory studies and tool prototypes highlight the feasibility of engaging young learners in designing generative LMs, there is a need for further research on what learners understand about generative language from both technical and socio-ethical perspectives when participating in design activities. 

> Manuscript submitted to ACM

4 Morales-Navarro et al. 

2.2 Model Building as a Sociotechnical Activity 

Many AI/ML literacies frameworks emphasize the importance of engaging young people in thinking about ethical and societal issues [ 54 , 77 ], yet such efforts are often disconnected from model-building activities [ 26 ]. A few exceptions include studies in which young people evaluate each other’s projects and models [ 34 ], create ethical matrices for their own AI/ML projects [ 85 ], or use cards with ethical questions to reflect on their own projects [ 7 ]. Taking a sociotechnical approach to model building is imperative, as potentially harmful societal consequences and implications of AI/ML systems are closely intertwined with functionality failures [ 25 , 60 , 63 ]. However, embedding socio-ethical concerns in the model-building process presents challenges even for experts, as ethics and societal considerations are often perceived as personal endeavors or as obstacles that hinder progress in organizational cultures that prioritize efficiency, speed, and innovation [ 1, 3, 15 ]. Additionally, model designers often lack the necessary infrastructure and support to deeply engage with the socio-ethical implications of their own projects [ 15 ]. As such, ‘critical awakenings’ and interest in socio-ethical issues are seen as individual efforts to combat the pervasive techno-optimism and techno-solutionism of the AI/ML industry [ 45 ]. Such difficulties are also present in computing education with young people, who are often introduced to computing and building AI/ML models as value-neutral and strictly technical activities [ 39 , 83 ]. Addressing these challenges not only involves designing interventions that support socio-ethical thinking in model-building activities but also building frameworks that support the study of novices’ understandings of AI/ML from both socio-ethical and technical perspectives. In the following sections, we review how young people’s understandings of AI/ML systems have been studied in prior research and propose taking an in-pieces approach that can support the analysis of both socio-ethical and technical understandings. 

2.3 Young People’s Understanding of AI/ML 

With the widespread adoption of AI/ML systems, researchers have started to investigate how young people make sense of AI/ML by looking into their everyday understandings [ 46 , 52 ]. In this section, we review three ways in which young people’s understanding of AI/ML is framed in existing research: attributions, intuitive theories and misconceptions, and critical conceptions. 

2.3.1 Attributions framing. Several studies have investigated young people’s understandings of AI/ML systems by examining how they attribute human and non-human characteristics to AI/ML applications. Studies from the attribution perspective center on young people’s conceptions of the anthropomorphic qualities of AI/ML systems, such as sentience, emotion, abilities, and intelligence. As such, these studies often investigate children’s perception of AI/ML systems in terms of intelligence or “smartness” [ 2, 23 , 86 , 87 ] or in comparison to human abilities [ 24 , 81 ]. While these studies provide insights into young people’s perceptions of AI/ML, they do not account for understandings of systems’ inner workings. 

2.3.2 Functional framing. Far less attention has been given to young people’s everyday understandings of how AI/ML systems work, with most of this research investigating how young people build intuitive theories. From these theories, researchers derive misconceptions that arise when the theories do not align with the scientifically-accepted explanations. 

Intuitive Theories. Researchers have studied how young people build theories through their everyday interactions with AI/ML systems. This work highlights that young people use pre-existing knowledge to build theories or hypotheses about AI/ML systems, including egocentric hypotheses (projecting their own thinking processes and actions on AI) and observational ad hoc hypotheses (based on observed behaviors of AI/ML systems) [ 22 ]. Other theories involve 

> Manuscript submitted to ACM

Building to Understand 5ideas about data storage and access [ 76 ], and decision-making processes based on data [ 42 ]. More recently, Dangol et al . [14] described three common mental models that children have about how AI/ML systems reason: inductive reasoning (AI/ML systems generalize patterns from data to make predictions), deductive reasoning (AI/ML systems apply predefined rules), and inherent reasoning (AI/ML systems are inherently intelligent). While these studies contribute detailed evidence on children’s understanding of AI/ML, they align with research in conceptual development, which argues that children organize everyday understandings to build “a cohesive, unitary theory that might contain misconceptions of scientific information.” [ 84 ] Such an approach has led to the idea that intuitive theories that differ from scientific explanations might make it harder for learners to adopt formal understandings [10, 28, 47]. 

Misconceptions. Over the past five years, a number of studies have investigated young people’s misconceptions of AI/ML systems. Researchers argue that interacting with black-boxed AI/ML systems may lead young people to develop inaccurate or simplified mental models that can be difficult to overcome in instruction [ 28 ]. While enumerating all the misconceptions present in the literature is beyond the scope of this paper, we review some common misconceptions and invite readers to follow up on the references. Several studies highlight that learners often assume that AI/ML systems learn like humans and possess intuition and common sense [ 46 , 49 ]. A variation of this misconception is what Marx et al . [46] call “continuous learning,” which involves the idea that AI/ML systems learn autonomously and improve themselves while being used. Previous research, however, argues that novices may also hold the opposite misconception: that humans decide on all the specifications and program all possible behaviors of AI/ML systems [ 42 , 46 , 48 ]. Other misconceptions include arguing that AI/ML systems always provide exact, deterministic outputs [ 46 ]. Some studies highlight that learners may assume that the raw data used to train an AI/ML system is stored and searched by the system every time the system is used [46]. While misconceptions have received increasing research attention in AI/ML education and child-computer interaction, research in the learning sciences has long questioned the deficit orientation of viewing novices and young people as holders of flawed ideas [ 9, 43 , 59 , 71 ]. For instance, Pea [59] explains that “it is not that students literally believe that the computer has a mind” but that this is an analogy that is expected, as novices do not have exposure to technical knowledge and language to be able to build more technically accurate explanations. 

2.3.3 Critical framing. Recent studies have investigated young people’s everyday critical and socio-ethical under-standings. Several studies have investigated youth’s perceptions of fairness and potentially harmful algorithmic biases [11 , 13 , 27 , 41 , 67 , 68 ]. Other researchers have explored broad socio-ethical stances that youth may have about AI/ML systems, related to humans becoming over-dependent on AI/ML systems[ 75 ], concerns about privacy [ 27 , 40 , 42 ], misinformation and fact-checking [ 13 ], mechanisms for human oversight [ 13 ], and the regulation of AI/ML systems [ 40 ]. Whereas this work shows diverse ways in which young people understand critical and socio-ethical aspects of AI/ML systems, none of the studies cited above addressed the relationship between these critical and technical understandings that youth may have. Here, we see the potential for an integrative approach that can enable us to study both socio-ethical and technical understandings of AI/ML. 

2.4 An In-Pieces Approach 

We propose taking an in-pieces approach to novice understandings that accounts for incoherence and context, recognizes the value of learners’ existing understandings, centers on how systems work, and can be used to study both technical and socio-ethical understandings in tandem. While current perspectives offer insights into how young people perceive 

> Manuscript submitted to ACM

6 Morales-Navarro et al. AI/ML, the focus on attributions, intuitive theories, and misconceptions may also restrict our understanding of how young people’s everyday understandings can be leveraged for the design of learning tools and activities. In this section we bring together research on fragmented understanding of scientific phenomena [ 19 ] with research on fragmented socio-ethical and ideological thinking [ 61 ] and on people’s fragmented understanding of socio-technical systems [ 16 ]to argue that studying teens’ technical and socio-ethical understanding of language through an in-pieces approach can be promising to understand how such understandings are constructed, relate to each other, and emerge in context. Recently, researchers have used diSessa et al . [19] in-pieces theory to study teens’ understanding of AI/ML systems [ 65 ]. For instance, Chao and Jiang [ 65 ] have investigated how teens make sense of text classification models, noting that learners often use their conceptions of words and their meanings to make sense of the models; this coupling, they argue, may be an important knowledge piece that should be considered in natural language processing education. Morales-Navarro and Kafai [50] investigated teens’ everyday conceptions of AI/ML systems, such as TikTok filters and voice assistants, from an in-pieces perspective. Their analyses revealed that teens showed some understanding that ML systems learn from training data and that when being used, applications recognize patterns in input data and, depending on these, provide different outputs. We build on this work by extending it to consider socio-ethical understandings; to do so, we take into account research on ideology-in-pieces and algorithmic folk theories that have been used to study people’s socio-ethical thinking. Philip [61] synthesized diSessa’s work with theories of ideology, proposing the framework of “ideology-in-pieces” to study people’s sensemaking of socio-ethical issues. He argues that, unlike traditional concepts in science, ideas like justice, ethics, blame, and responsibility do not have normative meanings—rather, their meanings are constructed by communities. Philip claims that, when making sense of critical issues related to justice, for example, people rely on existing conceptions that are fragmented, socially situated within particular systems of power, and activated in specific contexts. Therefore, they are not always applied in consistent manners, with people exhibiting different socio-ethical understandings in different contexts: “Learning to use a concept in a particular context entails recognizing relevant features and making meaningful inferences in that context” [ 61 ]. This framing of socio-ethical thinking can be productive for the study of socio-ethical conceptions that learners may have about ML systems. DeVito et al.’s [16] conceptualization of algorithmic folk theories is based on the idea that people have fragmented understandings of sociotechnical systems. They argue that people’s understandings have a “fragmentary nature” characterized by instability and incoherence, where “pieces of information” activated together are combined to build folk theories. Mühling and Große-Bölting [52] addressed some of the contradictions and incoherence that may emerge in everyday understandings of ML systems, explaining that students draw on in-this-particular-context ideas to explain the phenomena they observe. Specifically, they built on earlier work by Rücker and Pinkwart [66] that recognizes that “an individual may hold several conceptions simultaneously, which may or may not be selected in a given context or situation.” Building on these theories, we argue that it is possible to study teens’ understanding of LMs by identifying pieces of technical and socio-ethical understandings and observing how these pieces relate to each other and are exhibited in the context of building models. As such, we ask: What socio-ethical and technical pieces of understanding do teens exhibit in-the-moment as they design generative small LMs? 

3 Methods 

Here, we describe the context of our research, the participatory design activities that teens engaged with, and our data collection and analysis approach. 

> Manuscript submitted to ACM

Building to Understand 7

> Table 1. Demographic Information

Pseudonym Age Gender Race Use of LLM-powered Systems Prior Experiences 

Brianna 15 Woman Asian/Pacific Islander, White Once a month CS, AIC Butterfly 14 Woman Black/African American Every other week AIC Darwin 15 Man Hispanic/Latinx Once a week AIC Drummer Boy 15 Man Hispanic/Latinx Once a month Dunkin Lover 15 Woman Black/African American Everyday CS, AI/ML, AIC Gregory 15 Man Black/African American Twice a week CS, AIC India 15 Woman Black/African American Twice a week CS Jason 15 Man Black/African American Once a month CS Jimmy Bob 15 Man White Once a week CS, AIC King 15 Man Black/African American Everyday CS, AI/ML, AIC Logan 14 Man Black/African American Once a week CS, AIC Meow Meow 15 Woman Asian/Pacific Islander Everyday CS, AI/ML Mordecai 15 Man Asian/Pacific Islander Once a week CS Ricardo 15 Man Hispanic/Latinx, Asian/Pacific Islander Everyday CS, AI/ML, AIC Shark 15 Man Black/African American Every other week Tyler 15 Man Black/African American Once a week CS, AIC CS = prior computing education, including workshops and computing courses at school AI/ML = prior AI/ML education, including workshops and AI/ML courses at school AIC = has learned about AI/ML in school (e.g., language arts teacher talked about ChatGPT in one lesson) 

3.1 Context and Participants 

We conducted participatory design activities with teens at a Northeastern US science center. These included four two-hour workshops in March and April 2025 and a two-week (4-hour-a-day) intensive summer workshop in July 2025. The science center educators invited the teens to take part in the study. Nineteen of the twenty-two fourteen-to-fifteen-year-olds enrolled in the program gave parental consent and assented to participate in research, and three did not attend the summer workshop. As such, this study involved sixteen teenagers (n=16). After the workshop, participants completed a demographic worksheet with questions about their prior computing and AI/ML experiences, use of LLMs, race, gender, and age (Table 1). All questions included a fill-in-the-blank option, and teens were given the choice to abstain from answering any of them. In terms of race and ethnicity, nine teens identified as Black/African-American, four as Asian/Pacific Islander, three as Latinx/Hispanic, and two as White, with two choosing more than one category. Eleven teens identified as men, and five identified as women. All teens reported using LLM-powered systems, with four using them everyday, two twice a week, five once a week, two every other week, and three once a month. Eleven teens reported that they had taken prior computer science courses or workshops, four had taken prior AI/ML courses or workshops, and nine had learned something about AI/ML in one of their classes at school. 2 Finally, we asked all teens to decide on their own pseudonyms [ 38 ]—fourteen teens provided their own, and two asked researchers to decide. The Institutional Review Board of the university of Pennsylvania approved the study protocol. 

> 2E.g., A language arts teacher talked about ChatGPT in one lesson. Manuscript submitted to ACM

8 Morales-Navarro et al. 

3.2 Research Approach and Positionality 

We aimed to position high school students as protagonists [ 32 ], or main decision-makers, in the process of building LMs. To scaffold such a participatory design sprint within a week [ 17 ], we partnered with educators at the local science center. One author has worked with teens at the science center for 10+ years, and another for five. One author is a science center educator who participated in the design, implementation, and analysis. We also recognize that our own identities and backgrounds shape our research approach. Our team represents at least five racial/ethnic identities, three gender identities, and academic expertise in the learning sciences, human-computer interaction (HCI), and science education. Our team resides in the same city as the teens. 

3.3 Workshop Activities 

This paper focuses on the first week of the summer workshop, during which teenagers learned about and designed their own generative LMs. Prior to the summer, teens attended a series of four workshops in the spring, during which they reflected on their own use of LMs, learned about Markov chains, and participated in pre-interviews. During the summer, each workshop day started with a 30-minute game or warm-up (e.g., duck-duck-goose) and included a snack break. Workshop activities were facilitated by five adults, including an experienced science center educator, two graduate student researchers, and two undergraduate research assistants. Each day was scheduled as follows (see Figure 1 for an overview): 

Day 1: Human and artificial neural networks . Teens completed a card-sorting activity, an activity modeled after a card-sorting task for eliciting folk theories [ 16 ], where they sorted cards with words related to AI/ML. 3 We asked them to arrange the cards to represent how they thought AI/ML systems worked, using (or not using) as many as they wanted. They were also provided with blank cards to add new words. We explained that there was no right or wrong way to sort the cards and that the purpose was to learn about their thinking. The team introduced the history of artificial neural networks and their inspiration from human neural networks. Following, the teens visited the center’s “My Brain” exhibit with the bioscientist who designed it, followed by a discussion about human and machine learning. The final activity of the day was an embodied simulation of a single artificial neuron, where different teens played the roles of inputs, weights, bias, a perceptron, an activation function, and outputs. 4

Day 2: Temperature and training iterations . The day began with a review of Markov chains, which the teens had explored in the spring workshops, and a comparison between Markov chains and GPTs. During the discussion, facilitators drew connections to the neural network activities from the previous day, highlighting GPTs as an advanced type of neural network. Following, the teens explored different sample models built by the research team (small LMs trained using the NanoGPT framework). 5 The teens were asked to brainstorm how these models worked using the Big Papers method [ 89 ], prompted with the following questions: “How do you think these models work?”, “What are they useful for? What worked? Why?”, and “What are they not useful for? What didn’t work? Why?” 

> 3Words on the cards drew from vocabulary voiced by the teens in the pre-interviews.
> 4The activity was supported by a simple perceptron calculator web application.
> 5The examples included an Obama speech generator, a Friends screenplay generator, a Wicked screenplay generator, and a Presidential speech generator. Manuscript submitted to ACM

Building to Understand 9

Fig. 1. Workshop activities by day. 

> Manuscript submitted to ACM

10 Morales-Navarro et al. The teens compared outputs generated for nine different LMs trained on the same dataset (screenplays from the TV show Friends 6), with different training iterations 7 (400, 800, 1600) and different model temperatures 8 (0.4, 0.8, 1.6). After exploring outputs, teens brainstormed how training iterations and temperature influence outputs. Facilitators explained that training iterations enable models to adjust their weights, making connections to the artificial neuron activity from Day 1, and that temperature introduces randomness to text generation. Following, teens generated stories about Italian Brainrot characters 9 using an interactive tool in which they could control the parameter to observe how temperature influenced the randomness of the output, word-by-word. Finally, teens brainstormed three different ideas for the LMs they wanted to create. 

Day 3: Creating datasets to train models . Day 3 began with another Big Paper activity [ 89 ] in which teens shared their ideas about the role of data in LMs. Following, the head of the archives of the science center shared tips about intentionally building datasets. A facilitator introduced Olari and Romeike’s [ 55 ] AI/ML data framework, noting the critical role that data plays at all stages of development of LMs. Then, teens read articles about data workers, their role, and the need for humane labor practices. The teens returned to their LM ideas and chose one to pursue. Based on their chosen ideas, they created an ethical matrix [ 58 ]. 10 Following, the teens created and tokenized 11 a dataset for their own models. Facilitators demonstrated the process, which used a provided JavaScript script using a natural language processing library, RiTa [ 30 ]. In groups of two to three, the teens were tasked to design datasets for their projects (20,000 to 300,000 tokens). After creating their datasets, the teens filled in “training orders,” specifying how many iterations they wanted their models to be trained for (2400, 1200, or 600 iterations), what temperature their models should generate with (0.8, 0.4, or 1.6), and up to four prompts (introduced as “seeds” for generating text). Because the computers at the science center did not have enough computing power to train models, the models were trained by three researchers overnight using Kaparthy’s [ 36 ]nanoGPT framework 12 (for more details, see Willison [88]). 

Day 4: Iterating on models and reflecting on impact . To scaffold and make visible the teens’ thinking about socio-ethical issues related to LMs, we adapted Bilstrup et al .’s [ 7] ethical cards activity. We provided teens with eight cards with questions about data collection, automation, transparency, discrimination, power balance, visibility, and harm. The teens picked three cards and addressed the questions on the cards in relation to their projects. For example, the card titled “harm” included the following questions: “Who could be harmed by this system? How can we prevent harm?” Each group created and presented a poster discussing potential socio-ethical concerns about their projects. After each presentation, the groups answered questions from their peers. Following, the teens explored the outputs of their own models (see Table 2 for details of each project). On a worksheet, they reflected on how training iterations, temperature, training data, and prompts shaped the outputs. Then, they evaluated each other’s projects, addressing the following questions: “What did you notice in other people’s models?”, 

> 6Training dataset: 1285903 tokens, validation dataset: 142965 tokens.
> 7A training iteration is a single round of the training process where the model processes one batch of data and updates its parameters (weights and biases).
> 8Temperature is a parameter that controls the randomness of the generated text
> 9Italian Brainrot is a set of internet memes that emerged in 2025.
> 10 Ethical matrices are two-dimensional tables where relevant parties and values are listed along two axes, and designers identify how values align with different parties, noting potential conflicts. This tool was adapted from bioethics to the development of AI/ML systems [ 56 ] and later to AI/ML education [58].
> 11 Tokenization is the process of transforming text into a sequence of tokens, which can be words, characters, or subwords. This is a necessary step in preparing data for training; in tokenizing data, each token is assigned a unique integer used to create a vector representation that is then used in training a model.
> 12 nanoGPT is a reimplementation of OpenAI’s GPT-2 to quickly train and fine-tune medium-sized GPTs. Manuscript submitted to ACM

Building to Understand 11 “Which models work better?”, and “Why do you think these worked better?” After peer evaluation, they brainstormed how to improve their own models. Finally, researchers facilitated a discussion about the environmental impact of LMs through news articles and a conversation about the energy cost of training their own LMs. 13 The teens refined their datasets for researchers to retrain their models overnight (see Table 2 for changes in projects). 

Day 5: Final presentations . The final day included four main activities: a card sorting activity, an exploration of the retrained models, preparation of project presentations, and presentations of their models. 

3.4 Data Collection and Analysis 

To identify the socio-ethical and technical pieces of knowledge that teens exhibited while participating in the construction of LMs, we took a moment-to-moment microgenetic approach to study team interactions and conversations in the design process. Such an approach allows researchers to “observe learning processes as they occur and do so in such a way as to permit strong inferences about learning processes” [ 8]. In CCI, the microgenetic approach has been applied using thematic analysis to study children’s understanding of programming [ 57 ] or scientific concepts when interacting with tangible interfaces [79]. We collected video recordings of group conversations, screen recordings of teens’ work on project computers, and artifacts generated by teens (posters, datasets, models, and presentations). Similar to other studies that have investigated teens’ understandings of AI/ML systems [ 69 ], we used thematic analysis to identify teens’ pieces of understanding. Specifically, we wanted to capture their technical and socio-ethical understandings when brainstorming, creating datasets, evaluating outputs, and discussing socio-ethical issues related to their projects. As such, we focused on the last three days of the workshop. To prepare the data for analysis, two researchers created videologs of 26 hours of video and screen recordings. First, the two researchers who videologged the data noted down some possible themes. Second, three researchers went through the data, creating inductive themes (with each theme being a possible piece of understanding). Following, the researchers grouped these themes into pieces of understanding. The coding process was iterative, with several check-ins and discussions with the larger research group. Finally, the three researchers applied the pieces to the data. The goal of the analysis was to identify all the possible pieces exhibited by participants, not their frequency or prevalence; as such, we did not quantify our findings. Overall, we identified ten technical pieces and ten socio-ethical pieces of understanding; these pieces are presented in the findings (see Table 3). 

4 Findings 

Throughout the five days of workshop activities, teens iteratively and collaboratively constructed their own LMs, varying in topics and scope (see Table 2). Two teams designed models to generate recipes: one used datasets from Kaggle (Recipe Generator), while the other (TV meals) carefully curated recipes related to food depicted on children’s TV shows (e.g., spaghetti tacos from iCarly). Two teams created screenplay generators: one on Transformers movie scripts (see Figure 2), and the other (BlueGPT) mixed screenplays of Bluey 14 with horror movies to create Bluey-themed horror scripts. The GradSpeechGPT team created a graduation speech generator. LyricsGPT designed a pop music lyric generator, and finally, one group created an animal facts generator based on text from National Geographic. The datasets used to train the models varied greatly in size, from 22,790 tokens to 226,484 tokens. 

> 13 While training the models overnight, researchers measured the energy consumed using a watt meter and shared with the teens that training their projects took on average 0.05 KWh, approximately the full battery capacity of a laptop for a model trained for 2400 iterations.
> 14 Bluey is an Australian animated children’s show. Manuscript submitted to ACM

12 Morales-Navarro et al. 

> Fig. 2. Screenshots of the TV Meals recipe generator designed by Dunkin Lover and Darwin (left) and the Transformer Script generator designed by Meow Meow, Gregory, and Jimmy Bob (right).

In the following sections, we introduce the different technical and socio-ethical pieces of understanding that teens exhibited during the workshop. Following, we highlight how these pieces relate to each other. 

4.1 Technical Understandings In-pieces 

During the workshop, teens exhibited several technical pieces (T) of understanding. While some of these were explicitly discussed in workshop activities (e.g., the artificial neuron simulation), participants expressed these pieces of under-standing beyond such activities, using them to explain the functionality of the LMs they constructed. These included pieces about training data, neural networks, and how LMs generate outputs. 

4.1.1 Training data. Teens voiced several pieces of technical understanding related to dataset design and data quality. Among these was the idea that datasets are designed (T1) . This piece frequently surfaced when teens interacted with 

> Manuscript submitted to ACM

Building to Understand 13 

Table 2. Projects, descriptions, and model details 

Project (Designers) Project Description & Changes Made from Day 4 to Day 5 Day 4 Models Day 5 Models 

TV Meals (Designed by: Dunkin Lover, India & Darwin) Project: A generator that “provides consumers with recipes from a variety of tv shows such as ICarly, Teen Titans Go, and Ratatouille” Changes: Organized the recipes better so they were laid out easier to read. Tokens: 22790 Iterations: 400, 800, 1600 Temperature: 0.4, 0.8, 1.6 Tokens: 22794 Iterations: 2400 Temperature: 0.4, 0.8, 1.6 Recipe Generator (Designed by: Butterfly & Drummer Boy) Project: A generator that “gives random recipes to people who want a yummylicious meal but don’t know what cuisine” Changes: Added spaces; Deleted gibberish. Tokens: 186516 Iterations: 2400 Temperature: 0.8 Tokens: 186257 Iterations: 600, 2400 Temperature: 0.8 Transformers Scripts (Designed by: Meow Meow, Gregory & Jimmy Bob) Project: A screenplay generator “that creates Transformers scripts” Changes: Replaced explicit words; Increased training iterations Tokens: 217879 Iterations: 2400 Temperature: 0.8, 1.6 Tokens: 217835 Iterations: 2400 Temperature: 0.4, 0.8, 1.6 GradSpeechGPT (Designed by: Briana & Mordecai) Project: A valedictorian speech generator Changes: Removed anything personal from dataset (names of relatives, years, etc) Tokens: 43745 Iterations: 600, 1200, 2400 Temperature: 0.4, 0.8, 1.6 Tokens: 41000 Iterations: 2400 Temperature: 0.4, 0.8, 1.6 BlueGPT (Designed by: Jason & Tyler) Project: A screenplay generator that “combines Bluey episodes with horror movies to create a Bluey horror movie or episode” Changes: Removed hyperlinks, explicit language, and one movie; Added 20 Bluey episodes Tokens: 226484 Iterations: 2400 Temperature: 0.8, 1.6 Tokens: 180826 Iterations: 600, 2400 Temperature: 0.4, 0.8, 1.6 lyricsGPT (Designed by: King & Shark) Project: A generator that “gives people song lyrics, to make the process of writing music easier and more streamlined” Changes: Changed the data sources used Tokens: 93616 Iterations: 2400 Temperature: 0.8 Tokens: 21371 Iterations: 600, 2400 Temperature: 0.4, 0.8, 1.6 Animal Facts (Designed by: Ricardo) Project: A generator that “provides useful information about any kind of animal from the real world” Changes: Removed all references and symbols from dataset Tokens: 85643 Iterations: 600, 2400 Temperature: 0.8, 1.6 Tokens: 53707 Iterations: 600, 2400 Temperature: 0.4, 0.8, 1.6 

and iterated on their own models. For instance, when describing how the outputs of his team’s model were shaped, Gregory lucidly explained, “you create a dataset, and then train on it”. For some teams, this involved making decisions about adding more data, removing data, or carefully editing the datasets. For example, teens voiced that data quality shapes LMs performance and outputs (T2) . This was particularly evident when teens iterated on their datasets. Shark explained that his team redesigned their dataset by 

> Manuscript submitted to ACM

14 Morales-Navarro et al. “taking out all the explicit words, replacing them with family-friendly words” so that the outputs would be appropriate for children. Other teens thought about data quality in terms of data diversity. Sometimes, these understandings emerged in relation to the personal experiences and identities of teens. For example, when designing a dataset for a recipe generator, Butterfly searched for puff puff recipes, explaining that she wanted to include Nigerian recipes as her family is Nigerian-American. Drummer Boy, whose family is Dominican, also searched for Dominican recipes and added them to the dataset. Such actions show evidence of teens’ understanding of how data quality and diversity shape model performance (T2) and taking action to intentionally design datasets (T1) representative of their lived experiences. These examples demonstrate how iterating on their datasets supported teens in recognizing that datasets are designed and that data quality decisions affect model behaviors. 

4.1.2 Neural networks. Teens expressed varying pieces of technical understandings related to the role of neural networks in LMs. For example, LMs are trained using networks of artificial neurons (T3) . On day 5, when asked by a researcher how LMs worked, Drummer Boy explained, “in the artificial neuron, you have the inputs times weights plus bias before they go to the activation function.” He further elaborated, saying that LMs are “not just shuffling everything together and dishing it out. After learning about the artificial neuron, there’s a lot more calculation that goes into it.” Another piece of technical understanding voiced by teens was that LMs learn by iteratively adjusting weights (T4) . On the last day of the workshop, Dunkin Lover explained: “The weights can go up and down, so that’s kind of what’s gonna decide if the output is gonna be negative or positive when it’s done doing all the math.” These pieces demonstrate teens’ understanding that LMs are not magical black boxes but rather sophisticated systems that use mathematical operations and weight adjustments to generate outputs. 

4.1.3 Output generation. Teens voiced different understandings about how temperature, probability, condensing, and searching data contribute to the generation of outputs. A common piece of technical understanding voiced by teens was that temperature, or randomness, shapes the outputs of LMs (T5) . Mordecai explained “the temperature is like how random it is.” Jason explained that his team tried different temperatures and compared outputs: It’s like the temperature helps run the model and output. So, too high of a temperature, the model might run different and, like, be all weird, but too low, it might also not be right. Gotta find the right temperature so the model can run efficiently. Through exploration of various outputs, teens recognized temperature as a key parameter that allows designers to have control over the randomness of the outputs generated. Despite the specificities of how data, neural networks, and temperature shape model behaviors, teens also voiced more naive pieces of technical understandings about how outputs are generated. Some teens expressed that LMs predict the most probable next token (T6). Meow Meow, for instance, explained that outputs depended on “some probability of word tokens, because remember the patterns and stuff.” Other teens argued that LMs output the most common answer (T7) or, as Darwin put it, “it finds the most efficient answer, most common answers.” Another piece of technical understanding that also emerged is that LMs output the average answer (T8) . Jimmy Bob elaborated, “It [the model] goes through iterations, make sure it’s good, and then you get the average answer.” Sometimes teens argued that LMs generate outputs by condensing data (T9) , a piece of technical understanding that can be seen as a precursor to thinking about representations and encoding. Meow Meow explained that the model “takes your dataset, condenses it” while Jimmy Bob said that models “mixed the dataset, it combines it and condenses information.” Another piece of technical understanding that emerged was that LMs generate outputs by searching the training dataset 

> Manuscript submitted to ACM

Building to Understand 15 

(T10) . Often, teens would hold two or more of these pieces of technical understanding at the same time. For instance, Meow Meow, who argued that models condense data, also explained that models “search data and then it gives you the output.” Similarly, Darwin, who was previously quoted for saying that models give you the most common answer, explained “the AI goes about finding its answers, so it starts with searching, then it thinks of it, and then it finds the most efficient answer.” These pieces reveal how teens grappled with both intuitive understandings and more refined understandings in their explanations for how outputs are generated. 

4.2 Socio-ethical Understandings In-pieces 

During the workshop, teens exhibited varying pieces of socio-ethical (SE) understandings related to responsibility, copyright, creativity, efficiency, misinformation, and discrimination. In the following subsections, we introduce each of these pieces. 

4.2.1 Responsibility. Throughout the workshop, teens voiced divergent and often contradictory understandings of who or what is responsible for the behaviors of LMs, including users, designers, and the systems. Sometimes, teens argued that users are responsible for the behaviors and potential harms of LMs (SE1) . A clear articulation of this piece came from India, who explained to her teammates, “the user would be responsible for any [output], because the system provides what the consumer asks.” For her, users of the system that her team designed were consumers with transactional interactions, where users receive what they ask for. Such a view frames LM-powered systems as neutral tools that can be used for good or bad, depending on the users’ intentions. A similar perspective was voiced by Brianna and Mordecai, the designers of the graduation speech generator, who explained that users are responsible for “mix[ing] your own stuff and then changing it to your liking” (Mordecai). Brianna furthered, “the user is responsible to not take the speech as it is and instead using it for structure and guidance.” When asked by a peer how users would know what to do, she explained that the team would add a disclaimer below the output. The idea of adding disclaimers, putting the onus on users, was also voiced by Dunkin Lover, who advocated for a notice that made clear that her team (TV meals) was not liable for any illness caused by the recipes generated by their LM. Teens also expressed that designers are responsible for the behaviors and potential harms of LMs (SE2). In addition to his initial claim that users were responsible for “mixing” outputs, Mordecai argued that if the GradSpeechGPT “makes a bad decision, we’re responsible because we gave it the information it needs.” Like Mordecai, other teens also ascribed responsibility to the designers of the datasets used to build models. Tyler, for instance, noted that “the developers were responsible for, like, if they added anything bad,” connecting how technical decisions related to dataset design have socio-ethical implications. A unique piece of socio-ethical understanding voiced only by one participant was that LMs are responsible for their behaviors and potential harms (SE3). Ricardo argued that “if the AI simply gave out the wrong information for some reason, then it would be on the system itself.” Yet, he also explained that “if the output is out to harm somebody, then it would be on us, on our end, because we gave it the information and trained it.” While Ricardo believed that the harms of misinformation were technical faults of the system, other harms to people would be the responsibility of the designers. Throughout these examples, we see how pieces of understanding related to responsibility were context-dependent, sometimes with the same teens, like Ricardo, ascribing the responsibility of different harms to different actors. 

4.2.2 Copyright and the use of data on the internet. Teens expressed two distinct pieces of understanding in relation to copyright and the use of data on the internet. While they argued that creating datasets with data available on the 

> Manuscript submitted to ACM

16 Morales-Navarro et al. 

internet may violate copyright laws (SE4) , they also claimed that data on the internet can be used to freely train LMs (SE5) .They explained the potential downsides of using copyrighted data to train models. Drummer Boy, for instance, asked Shark: “What if you get sued for the other people’s lyrics?” Notably, these concerns were primarily related to avoiding personal legal troubles, rather than broader ethical dilemmas of authorship and intellectual property. A different understanding of copyright and data use was voiced by teens who argued that any data available on the internet can be used to train LMs. For example, Drummer Boy argued that if the data is available on Kaggle, an open-source dataset repository, it is permitted to use it to train a model. To illustrate, we provide an example from Ricardo, who challenged another group (Transformers screenplay generator) with questions about copyright: 

Ricardo : How do you ensure that your GPT does not enter copyright infringement? 

Jimmy Bob : Because all the scripts are available online for the public anyway, so why would it be copyright if anybody can go in and get it? 

Ricardo : What if you’re using the same characters to make a new film? 

Jimmy Bob : But all the characters are already in the script online. 

Gregory : I forgot to mention we are licensed by Hasbro, so we can do whatever we want. In this conversation, we see clear evidence of the two pieces of understanding—that using data from the internet can infringe copyright laws (Ricardo, Gregory) and that data from the internet can be used freely to train generative models without permission (Jimmy Bob)—evident in the interaction. Another example came from Logan, who argued that data from the internet cannot simply be appropriated for model training because of copyright restrictions (SE4) and because “we need permission.” Logan, grounding his understanding of copyright in his lived experiences, explained that he had been involved in the City Community Youth Court, an out-of-school restorative justice program, where he learned that asking for permission to use data is important. Such pieces of understandings about data and copyright were often exhibited when teens interacted with projects their peers created. 

4.2.3 Creativity and “creative jobs”. Teens also voiced socio-ethical understandings related to creativity and creative jobs. A frequently surfaced piece of understanding was that LMs devalue human creativity (SE6) . For example, teens considered the effects of LMs at a societal level, highlighting how “AI slop” 15 may devalue the arts. Brianna explained that using screenplay generators “could decrease the value of movies in general because they’re coming out at a much faster pace.” Gregory, one of the creators of the screenplay generator, explained that they were concerned the most about “the replacement of, well, the removal of creativity,” explaining that, even though they generated a bunch of scripts, these did not seem as creative as human-generated ones. Similarly, Jimmy Bob was particularly concerned with novelty, positing that screenplay generators would only replicate the style and tropes of old movies, as they were trained on past screenplays. Another piece of understanding exhibited by teens was that creative jobs would become less valuable due to LMs (SE7) .16 Shark, one of the creators of the lyricsGPT, acknowledged that “lyricists will still have the job of, like, checking it, proofreading it, and then, sort of, editing it to fit the artist’s own style [...] but it won’t be as big a job.” Similarly, Gregory openly accepted that their screenplay generator “ will be putting the screenwriters or whatever out 

> 15 AI slop is cheap AI/ML-generated content with little intentionality, uncritical deployment, and “soullessness” [70].
> 16 We acknowledge that all labor is creative [ 64 ]. We use the terms “creative jobs” and “creative workers” since these were used by teens to refer to screenplay writers and lyricists. Manuscript submitted to ACM

Building to Understand 17 of a job, but they will still have the job of correcting these scripts.” Jimmy Boy acknowledged that creative jobs could be less valuable but proposed an alternative, explaining that one way to prevent AI/ML systems from taking away jobs is “only giving those scriptwriters access to that AI or only allowing scriptwriters to go in and edit it to make it more human-like.” Here, we see teens understand how generative LMs may transform and restructure creative roles. 

4.2.4 Efficiency. A pervasive piece of socio-ethical understanding that mediated teens’ understanding of AI/ML was that LMs make human tasks more efficient (SE8) . This idea was brought up by teens across all groups. According to the teens, their LMs could write songs and screenplays more efficiently, make it easier to find information and cook food, or create graduation speeches more quickly. For example, even Jimmy Bob, who argued for workers’ control of LMs, noted that using a generative model could “shave a couple of weeks” of work off by giving writers a “baseline of what the movie plot could be.” Ricardo also emphasized efficiency as the justification for his animal fact generator, claiming that instead of reading many articles written by expert users, people who want to learn about animals could “learn quickly about it” through short-form text generated by their LM. 

4.2.5 Misinformation and discrimination. Teens also surfaced common perceptions that misinformation and discrimi-nation are undesirable in LMs. The misinformation is undesirable (SE9) piece surfaced when teens talked about creating datasets. Meow Meow, for instance, acknowledged that dataset designers have the responsibility “to look out for misinformation and the accuracy of the information you were feeding it.” The discrimination is undesirable (SE10) 

piece was voiced when considering the possible implications of LMs: “the lyric generator can cause discrimination, which can harm people” (Jason). These pieces show that learners’ understandings of LMs included prioritizing the mitigation of misinformation and discrimination as essential components of model design. 

4.3 Connecting Pieces and Building Understanding 

Building LMs provided teens with a context to integrate and connect pieces together to build an understanding of how AI/ML systems work. In this section, we provide evidence of how socio-ethical and technical pieces are related to each other and highlight contradictions that emerged in teens’ understanding of LMs. Throughout the workshop, we observed learners make connections between pieces of knowledge, building their understanding of LMs while constructing their own models. While we do not have the space to elaborate on every connection, Table 3 and Figure 3 show the different relationships between pieces of knowledge that we identified. In the following paragraphs we describe some of these connections. Such connections between technical pieces of knowledge were particularly evident among pieces related to datasets 

(T1, T2) . For instance, the idea that datasets are designed (T1) was often expressed in relation to understanding that data quality shapes performance and outputs (T2) . Gregory and Tyler both voiced their annoyance at the process of designing a dataset because they had to ensure that the data was of good quality. “That was just tedious!” Gregory complained when cleaning the data and removing inappropriate words. Similarly, Tyler explained that “filtering all the bad words we had in our scripts was probably the hardest thing that we did.” Such comments make clear the connection between their understanding of datasets being designed and how data quality shapes model behaviors. Often, the idea that datasets are designed (T1) was also related to teens’ understanding that LMs condense data (T9) or search the training dataset (T10) . We can see an example of the relationship between T1 and T9 when Mordecai explained: “you make the dataset, it [the model] combines all of them, condenses it for like a good amount of time” (see Figure 4). Socio-ethical pieces were also voiced in relation to each other. This was particularly evident when teens ascribed responsibility for LM behaviors and potential harms to designers (SE2) . This piece was often voiced in relation to 

> Manuscript submitted to ACM

18 Morales-Navarro et al. 

Table 3. Pieces and their relationships to each other 

Code Pieces of Understanding Related Socio-ethical Pieces Related Technical Pieces 

T1 Datasets are designed SE2, SE4, SE5, SE9, SE10 T2, T3, T9, T10 T2 Data quality shapes LMs performance and outputs SE2, SE4, SE5, SE9, SE10 T1, T3 T3 LMs are trained using networks of artificial neurons T1, T2, T4, T5, T6 T4 LMs learn by iteratively adjusting weights T3, T5, T9 T5 Temperature, or randomness, shapes the outputs of LMs T3, T4, T6 T6 LMs predict the most probable next token T3, T5, T7 T7 LMs output the most common answer T6, T8 T8 LMs output the average answer T7 T9 LMs generate outputs by condensing data T1, T4, T10 T10 LMs generate outputs by searching the training dataset T1, T9 SE1 Users are responsible for the behaviors and potential harms of LMs SE2, SE9 SE2 Designers are responsible for the behaviors and potential harms of LMs systems SE1, SE3, SE4, SE6, SE7, SE9, SE10 T1, T2 SE3 LMs are responsible for their behaviors and potential harms SE2, SE9, SE10 SE4 Creating datasets with data available on the internet may violate copyright laws SE2, SE5 T1, T2 SE5 Data on the internet can be used to freely train LMs SE4 T1, T2 SE6 LMs systems devalue human creativity SE2, SE7, SE8 SE7 Creative jobs would become less valuable due to LMs SE2, SE6, SE8 SE8 LMs systems make human tasks more efficient SE6, SE7 SE9 Misinformation is undesirable SE1, SE2, SE3 T1, T2 SE10 Discrimination is undesirable SE2, SE3 T2 

Fig. 3. Connections between technical pieces (blue edges), connections between socio-ethical pieces (red edges), and connections between a technical and a socio-ethical pieces (purple edges). 

> Manuscript submitted to ACM

Building to Understand 19 

> Fig. 4. Examples of connected technical pieces (left), connected socio-ethical pieces (center), and the connection between a technical and a socio-ethical pieces (right).

potential copyright violations (SE4) , devaluing human creativity and creative jobs (SE6, SE7) , and misinformation and discrimination being undesirable (SE9, SE10) . For example, consider the following reflection by Shark: “we designed our system, and it automates something that humans can do, but the lyricists will still have the job of like checking it, proofreading it” (see Figure 4). Here, his understanding of the responsibility of the designer (SE2) in relation to the automation and transformation of creative jobs (SE7) is evident. Another example of (SE2) being related to another socio-ethical piece came from Gregory, who voiced: “we are licensed by Hasbro, so we can do whatever we want.” This sentence shows Gregory’s understanding that designers are responsible (SE2) and that using data from the internet without the required permissions could lead to copyright violations (SE4) .Technical and socio-ethical pieces were also often connected to each other as learners built understanding about the models they created. This was especially clear when teens explained how the design of datasets (T1) related to socio-ethical issues, including designers being responsible for system behaviors (SE2) , possible copyright violations 

(SE4) , using data from the internet (SE5) , and misinformation (SE9) . Mordecai, for instance, explained “if it [the model] makes a bad decision, we’re responsible because we gave it, like, the data or information it needs and we supplied it with [them].” Here, his understanding of the responsibility of designers (SE2) is intertwined with his understanding that datasets are designed (T1) . Another example that illustrates how T1 is related to a socio-ethical piece came from Brianna, who explained, “it’s like deciding on the data and building a dataset was important but it was really important to look out for misinformation and the accuracy of the information we were feeding it” (see Figure 4). Here we can see how T1 was related to misinformation being undesirable (SE9) .The relationships between pieces often also illustrated contradictions in how teens understand LMs. Teens commonly voiced contradictory socio-ethical pieces when talking about their own models and peers’ models. For example, Drummer Boy asked Shark, “What if you get sued for the other people’s lyrics?” This question shows his understanding that using other people’s work may be a copyright violation (SE4) . Yet, a few minutes later, he explained: “we used recipes from the internet; anyone can find that anyone can use it; we just made it more accessible for everyone, easier, no copyrights and nothing like that,” when talking about his own model (SE5) . Such contradictions were also present in teens’ technical understandings. For instance, consider Meow Meow’s explanation of how LMs works: “It searches data. 

> Manuscript submitted to ACM

20 Morales-Navarro et al. And then it gives you a dataset, condenses it. And then, once it got all this information, you train it.” Here, different ideas about how LMs generate outputs are muddled together (T9, T10, T3) . Such contradictions are evidence of how unstable novices’ understanding may be and how such understanding, as in the case of Shark, depends on context. These examples show us that teens’ understandings of LMs were fragmented, context-dependent, and sometimes contradictory. At the same time, they illustrate how pieces of technical and socio-ethical understandings are not disjointed; instead, these relate to each other and exist in an ecology of pieces. 

5 Discussion 

While prior research demonstrates the feasibility of engaging teens in the construction of generative LMs [ 5 , 12 , 51 , 62 ], such work does not address how construction may support teens in understanding LMs. Through this paper, we contribute an inventory of technical and socio-ethical pieces of understandings of LMs that teens exhibited when participating in LM construction activities. We discuss these understandings in relation to prior research on AI/ML and sensemaking. Following, we argue why an in-pieces approach may be particularly helpful in studying the technical and socio-ethical sensemaking of LMs. Finally, we discuss implications for the design of learning tools and activities. 

5.1 Teens’ Technical and Socio-ethical Understandings 

Research on construction in CCI argues that, when young people build computing systems, they can better understand how these work and the societal implications of such systems [ 18 , 31 , 32 ]. However, there is no prior evidence of the kinds of understanding teens may exhibit when building LMs. We documented a collection of pieces of understandings that teens demonstrated when designing their own LMs, providing evidence of what young people think about LMs while engaging in construction activities. Here, we discuss how our findings relate to prior research on sensemaking of AI/ML systems. The technical pieces of understanding exhibited by youth varied from naive elements to more sophisticated ideas about how data, training iterations, and neural networks shape the outputs of LMs. Some pieces of understandings observed in our study had already been examined in prior research looking at young people’s understanding when using AI/ML systems. For example, like Marx et al . [46] , we observed teens’ understandings that models generate outputs by searching the training dataset (T10) . Additionally, similar to prior research, the teens exhibited understandings that models make predictions (T6) [14 ] and data shapes model performance (T2) [42 ]. Our work supports that such pieces of understanding may be common among novice teens and presents a selection of more sophisticated pieces of understandings that had not been documented in prior literature. More importantly, our work emphasizes that naive and more sophisticated pieces coexist in teens’ understandings of LMs. The socio-ethical pieces observed in the study were also diverse. As documented in prior literature, teens in our study also exhibited understandings that discrimination is undesirable (SE10) [ 13 , 27 , 41 , 67 ], misinformation is undesirable 

(SE9) [13 ], and AI/ML systems may devalue human agency and creativity (SE6) [ 74 ]. While our work affirms that teens may hold such pieces of understanding, it also highlights the complexity of teens’ socio-ethical thinking, which were diverse and divergent. For example, teens ascribed responsibility for the behaviors and potential harms of LMs to varying parties, voiced contradictory understandings about the use of data and copyright, and diverged in their optimism for such technologies. With such diverse technical and socio-ethical understandings of LMs, we argue, it is necessary to take an ecological perspective to study how these relate to each other and emerge in context. 

> Manuscript submitted to ACM

Building to Understand 21 

5.2 Understandings in Pieces 

In this paper, we took an in-pieces approach that builds on research on knowledge-in-pieces [ 19 ], ideology-in-pieces [ 61 ], and algorithmic folk theories [ 16 ]. These theoretical frameworks argue that understanding of phenomena is fragmented, characterized by instability (and sometimes incoherence), and that different pieces of understanding are activated in different contexts. By bringing together work on fragmented understandings of scientific phenomena [ 19 ], fragmented socio-ethical and ideological thinking [ 61 ], and fragmented understandings of socio-technical systems [ 16 ]we argue that studying teens’ technical and socio-ethical understanding of LMs through an in-pieces approach can be a fruitful approach to unpack how such understandings are built, relate to each other, and emerge in context. In our study, teens exhibited an extensive collection of pieces depicting novices’ unstable and fragmented under-standings of LMs. In the context of building their own LMs, these pieces came together in different arrangements that combined various technical and socio-ethical pieces. In the case of technical pieces, these arrangements often included naive pieces (e.g., LMs generate outputs by condensing data (T9) or searching the dataset (T10) ) combined with more formal or normative pieces (e.g., LMs are trained using networks of artificial neurons (T3) ). While we could dismiss naive pieces as misconceptions and label them as obstacles for learning, like Smith et al . [71] who argue that all knowledge is productive for learning, we see value in such thinking as resources for growth, refinement, and reorganization. For example, the idea that LMs output the most common answer (T8) has the potential to be a precursor of other pieces that account for the roles of probability (T6) and temperature (T6) in output generation. The apparent contradictions are evidence of the instability of novice understanding and how, in the context of building models, novices can refine and reorganize their understandings to incorporate more normative and technically accepted explanations. In the case of socio-ethical pieces, contradictory pieces are evidence that socio-ethical understandings are also unstable and highly context-dependent. For instance, teens found it quite easy to reflect on potential limitations of LMs (e.g., SE4, SE6 ) when talking about their peers’ projects, but oftentimes adopted techno-optimist stances, prioritizing efficiency (SE8) , in their own projects. Here, like Philip [61] , we argue that ideology played a big role in shaping teens’ socio-ethical understanding. While we saw fleeting moments of ‘critical awakening’ [ 45 ] with teens voicing deep ethical concerns about data use (SE4) or imagining the possibility of workers controlling LMs and their use (SE7) ,these pieces of understanding were accompanied by pieces rooted in the mainstream techno-optimist ideology driving AI/ML development in the US (e.g., SE1, SE5, SE8 ). It is worth noting that most socio-ethical pieces were exhibited when participating in activities intentionally designed to elicit reflection—such scaffoldings were crucial in supporting socio-ethical thinking. This study was a first attempt at studying technical and socio-ethical understanding together using an in-pieces framework. We argue that if CCI and computing education scholars consider technical and socio-ethical aspects of AI/ML as equally important in learning experiences, it is necessary to analyze technical and socio-ethical understanding side-by-side, using a framework that accounts for the interrelated nature of technical and socio-ethical issues in computing. Future research should explore how teens’ understandings change over time, mapping changes in how young people build, refine, and connect pieces. Other studies could take a more traditional approach by comparing teens’ pieces before and after participating in AI/ML literacy interventions or comparing how different learning activities may support the refinement and connection of different pieces. 

> Manuscript submitted to ACM

22 Morales-Navarro et al. 

5.3 Implications for the Design of Learning Tools and Activities 

In our work, iteratively designing datasets, training models for different numbers of iterations, and generating outputs with different temperatures were crucial in supporting learners in making inferences about LMs and how they work. Comparing outputs was particularly productive for learners when observing differences in model behaviors. It was through this iterative process that learners voiced clear pieces of understandings that data content and quality (T2) ,training iterations (T4) ), and model temperature (T5) shape model behaviors. Although iterative design has been discussed before in CCI research on construction activities [ 32 ], AI/ML tools rarely support comparing models or evaluating models. Tools designed to train generative language models should enable learners to iteratively design datasets, play with different model parameters, and systematically compare outputs. Similarly, learning activities should emphasize the importance of iteratively designing and assessing LMs’ performance. It is worth noting that designing LMs in this study involved significant participation from researchers who trained the models overnight. Here, we see the need for tools that are accessible and manageable for novice model designers. We are excited for the potential of new interfaces that may support model training and fine-tuning on the browser [62]. In this study, most socio-ethical pieces were exhibited during activities with the explicit goal of reflecting on the limitations, implications, and decisions made in the process of building LMs. Using ethical matrices [ 58 ] and ethics cards [ 7] was helpful in scaffolding reflection. As such, we recommend that model design workshops also include time dedicated to thinking about socio-ethical issues. We also argue for the design of tools that can support learners in auditing and empirically investigating the behaviors and limitations of their own LMs. Adapting methods and toolkits that have been used with experts to scaffold socio-ethical thinking [15] may also be productive in supporting youth. In relation to both technical and socio-ethical aspects, from a pedagogical perspective, we made decisions to glassbox (data design, neural networks, temperature, copyright and data) and blackbox (embeddings, environmental concerns) certain aspects of LMs. Future research is necessary to assess what aspects of LMs should be made transparent to provide productive contexts for youth to better understand AI/ML systems. 

5.4 Limitations 

We acknowledge that our study of teens’ understanding is based on the ideas they expressed by talking or writing during the workshop. It is possible that some teens who did not talk often had different understandings than those who verbalized their ideas. As we have mentioned throughout the paper, understanding is dependent on context; as such, our findings should be interpreted within the context of the workshop and are not intended to be generalized to the broader population. Readers may find our insights applicable to similar contexts. We conducted these activities in the context of a summer program with motivated teens interested in science and technology, but the idea of engaging teenagers in designing LMs could be more impactful if designed for classroom settings with a wider range of learners, not just those with interest and access to an out-of-school program. It is important to replicate these kinds of learning activities and analysis in different contexts in which teens design LMs to gain more evidence about the kinds of understandings they may have. 

6 Conclusion 

CCI research argues that engaging learners in construction activities supports the development of their understanding of computing systems. Yet, in the case of generative language models, prior research shows the feasibility of engaging teens in designing models without sufficient evidence of the kinds of understandings they may have. We conducted a 

> Manuscript submitted to ACM

Building to Understand 23 participatory design workshop in which sixteen teens designed generative language models (e.g., screenplay, recipe, and lyric generators) to investigate their technical and socio-ethical understandings. We documented an inventory of "pieces of understandings" that demonstrate that the teens in the study held a collection of complex, divergent, naive, and sophisticated ideas. Our findings suggest that taking an in-pieces approach is not only a viable one, but also a necessary one, which can consider and analyze technical and socio-ethical understandings in tandem. We hope that this work motivates future research that supports teens in designing generative language models to develop technical and socio-ethical understandings of these systems. Such understandings are necessary for young people to understand the world that they live in and to see AI/ML technologies not as inevitable, but as systems that are designed and maintained, opening doors for them to see themselves as potential designers of these ubiquitous systems. 

7 Selection and Participation of Children 

We recruited teens enrolled in a STEM afterschool program in a city located in the Northeastern United States. Teens were invited by the organizer of the STEM program to participate via email and through paper handouts. Parents received consent forms prior to the study, which included a brief explanation of the research, and the teens assented to their participation. Furthermore, the lead researcher met with parents to answer any questions they had about the workshops and study. Research protocols and data collection methods were approved by the IRB board of Pennsylvania. 

Acknowledgments 

With regards to Elo Esalomi for their support in data collection. This work was partially supported by National Science Foundation grants (#2414590, #2333469), a Penn AI fellowship, and a rapid response grant from the Spencer Foundation, the Kapor Center, the William T. Grant Foundation, and the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation. 

References 

[1] Sanna J. Ali, Angèle Christin, Andrew Smart, and Riitta Katila. 2023. Walking the Walk of AI Ethics: Organizational Challenges and the Individual-ization of Risk among Ethics Entrepreneurs. In Proceedings of the 2023 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency (Chicago, IL, USA) (FAccT ’23) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 217–226. doi:10.1145/3593013.3593990 [2] Valentina Andries and Judy Robertson. 2023. Alexa doesn’t have that many feelings: Children’s understanding of AI through interactions with smart speakers in their homes. Computers and Education: Artificial Intelligence 5 (2023), 100176. [3] Netta Avnoon, Dan M Kotliar, and Shira Rivnai-Bahir. 2024. Contextualizing the ethics of algorithms: A socio-professional approach. New Media & Society 26, 10 (2024), 5962–5982. [4] Erik Barendsen, Violetta Lonati, Keith Quille, Rukiye Altin, Monica Divitini, Sara Hooshangi, Oscar Karnalim, Natalie Kiesler, Madison Melton, Calkin Suero Montero, and Anna Morpurgo. 2025. Teaching and Learning AI in K-12 Informatics Education. In 2024 Working Group Reports on 1st ACM Virtual Global Computing Education Conference (USA) (SIGCSE Virtual–WGR 2024) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 15–40. doi:10.1145/3708550.3730560 [5] Karl-Emil Kjær Bilstrup, Luke Connelly, Line Have Musaeus, Magnus Høholt Kaspersen, and Marianne Graves Petersen. 2025. From Automation to Integration: Designing Opportunities for Students and Teachers to Act Skillfully Around AI in Existing K-12 Subjects. In Proceedings of the 24th Interaction Design and Children (IDC ’25) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 221–235. doi:10.1145/3713043.3728857 [6] Karl-Emil Kjær Bilstrup, Magnus Høholt Kaspersen, Niels Olof Bouvin, and Marianne Graves Petersen. 2024. ml-machine.org: Infrastructuring a Research Product to Disseminate AI Literacy in Education. In Proceedings of the 2024 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems 

(Honolulu, HI, USA) (CHI ’24) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 272, 16 pages. doi:10.1145/3613904.3642539 [7] Karl-Emil Kjær Bilstrup, Magnus H. Kaspersen, and Marianne Graves Petersen. 2020. Staging Reflections on Ethical Dilemmas in Machine Learning: A Card-Based Design Workshop for High School Students. In Proceedings of the 2020 ACM Designing Interactive Systems Conference (Eindhoven, Netherlands) (DIS ’20) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1211–1222. doi:10.1145/3357236.3395558 [8] Clark A Chinn and Bruce L Sherin. 2014. Microgenetic methods. The Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences 2 (2014), 171–190. [9] Douglas B Clark and Marcia C Linn. 2013. The knowledge integration perspective: Connections across research and education. In International handbook of research on conceptual change . Routledge, , 520–538. [10] John Clement. 1982. Students’ preconceptions in introductory mechanics. American Journal of physics 50, 1 (1982), 66–71. Manuscript submitted to ACM 24 Morales-Navarro et al. 

[11] Merijke Coenraad. 2022. “That’s what techquity is”: youth perceptions of technological and algorithmic bias. Information and Learning Sciences 123, 7/8 (2022), 500–525. [12] Luke Connelly, Karl-Emil Kjær Bilstrup, and Marianne Graves Petersen. 2025. Beyond LLMs as Black Boxes: Activities and an Educational Tool Supporting Unplugged and Digital AI Learning Activities for K-12 Classrooms. In Adjunct Proceedings of the Sixth Decennial Aarhus Conference: Computing X Crisis (AAR Adjunct ’25) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 11, 4 pages. doi:10.1145/3737609.3747112 [13] Aayushi Dangol, Robert Wolfe, Akeiylah Dewitt, Ben Chickadel, Julie Kientz, and Sayamindu Dasgupta. 2025. Reading AI and Reading the World: Using an Interactive AI System to Promote Children’s Understanding of AI Bias. ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact. 32, 6, Article 66 (Dec. 2025), 30 pages. doi:10.1145/3762807 [14] Aayushi Dangol, Robert Wolfe, Runhua Zhao, JaeWon Kim, Trushaa Ramanan, Katie Davis, and Julie A. Kientz. 2025. Children’s Mental Models of AI Reasoning: Implications for AI Literacy Education. In Proceedings of the 24th Interaction Design and Children (IDC ’25) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 106–123. doi:10.1145/3713043.3728856 [15] Wesley Hanwen Deng, Solon Barocas, and Jennifer Wortman Vaughan. 2025. Supporting Industry Computing Researchers in Assessing, Articulating, and Addressing the Potential Negative Societal Impact of Their Work. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 9, 2 (2025), 1–37. [16] Michael A. DeVito, Jeremy Birnholtz, Jeffery T. Hancock, Megan French, and Sunny Liu. 2018. How People Form Folk Theories of Social Media Feeds and What it Means for How We Study Self-Presentation. In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems 

(Montreal QC, Canada) (CHI ’18) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–12. doi:10.1145/3173574.3173694 [17] Christian Dindler, Ole Sejer Iversen, Katrine Holm Kanstrup, Maarten Van Mechelen, and Marie-Louise Wagner. 2024. Participatory Design Sprints -Employing PD Principles in a Condensed Format. In Proceedings of the Participatory Design Conference 2024: Exploratory Papers and Workshops -Volume 2 (Sibu, Malaysia) (PDC ’24) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 93–97. doi:10.1145/3661455.3669876 [18] Christian Dindler, Rachel Smith, and Ole Sejer Iversen. 2020. Computational empowerment: participatory design in education. CoDesign 16, 1 (2020), 66–80. [19] Andrea A diSessa, Nicole M Gillespie, and Jennifer B Esterly. 2004. Coherence versus fragmentation in the development of the concept of force. 

Cognitive science 28, 6 (2004), 843–900. [20] Stefania Druga. 2018. Growing up with AI: Cognimates: from coding to teaching machines . Ph. D. Dissertation. Massachusetts Institute of Technology. [21] Stefania Druga and Amy J Ko. 2021. How do children’s perceptions of machine intelligence change when training and coding smart programs?. In 

Proceedings of the 20th Annual ACM Interaction Design and Children Conference (Athens, Greece) (IDC ’21) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 49–61. doi:10.1145/3459990.3460712 [22] Stefania Druga and Amy J Ko. 2021. How do children’s perceptions of machine intelligence change when training and coding smart programs?. In 

Interaction design and children . , , 49–61. [23] Stefania Druga, Randi Williams, Hae Won Park, and Cynthia Breazeal. 2018. How smart are the smart toys? children and parents’ agent interaction and intelligence attribution. In Proceedings of the 17th ACM Conference on Interaction Design and Children (Trondheim, Norway) (IDC ’18) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 231–240. doi:10.1145/3202185.3202741 [24] Janik Festerling and Iram Siraj. 2020. Alexa, what are you? Exploring primary school children’s ontological perceptions of digital voice assistants in open interactions. Human Development 64, 1 (2020), 26–43. [25] Casey Fiesler and Natalie Garrett. 2020. Ethical Tech Starts With Addressing Ethical Debt. WIRED. https://www.wired.com/story/opinion-ethical-tech-starts-with-addressing-ethical-debt/ [26] Xingjian (Lance) Gu and Barbara J. Ericson. 2025. AI Literacy in K-12 and Higher Education in the Wake of Generative AI: An Integrative Review. In 

Proceedings of the 2025 ACM Conference on International Computing Education Research V.1 (ICER ’25) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 125–140. doi:10.1145/3702652.3744217 [27] Dagmar Mercedes Heeg and Lucy Avraamidou. 2025. Young children’s understanding of AI. Education and Information Technologies 30, 8 (2025), 10207–10230. [28] Tom Hitron, Yoav Orlev, Iddo Wald, Ariel Shamir, Hadas Erel, and Oren Zuckerman. 2019. Can children understand machine learning concepts? The effect of uncovering black boxes. In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems . , , 1–11. [29] Arthur Hjorth. 2021. NaturalLanguageProcesing4All: - A Constructionist NLP tool for Scaffolding Students’ Exploration of Text. In Proceedings of the 17th ACM Conference on International Computing Education Research (Virtual Event, USA) (ICER 2021) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 347–354. doi:10.1145/3446871.3469749 [30] Daniel C. Howe. 2025. RiTa for JavaScript (ritajs). https://github.com/dhowe/ritajs [31] Netta Iivari, Leena Ventä-Olkkonen, Heidi Hartikainen, Sumita Sharma, Essi Lehto, Jenni Holappa, and Tonja Molin-Juustila. 2023. Computational empowerment of children: Design research on empowering and impactful designs by children. International Journal of Child-Computer Interaction 

37 (2023), 100600. [32] Ole Sejer Iversen, Rachel Charlotte Smith, and Christian Dindler. 2017. Child as Protagonist: Expanding the Role of Children in Participatory Design. In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Interaction Design and Children (Stanford, California, USA) (IDC ’17) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 27–37. doi:10.1145/3078072.3079725 [33] Ole Sejer Iversen, Rachel Charlotte Smith, and Christian Dindler. 2018. From computational thinking to computational empowerment: a 21st century PD agenda. In Proceedings of the 15th Participatory Design Conference: Full Papers - Volume 1 (Hasselt and Genk, Belgium) (PDC ’18) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 7, 11 pages. doi:10.1145/3210586.3210592 Manuscript submitted to ACM Building to Understand 25 

[34] Juho Kahila, Henriikka Vartiainen, Matti Tedre, Eetu Arkko, Anssi Lin, Nicolas Pope, Ilkka Jormanainen, and Teemu Valtonen. 2024. Pedagogical framework for cultivating children’s data agency and creative abilities in the age of AI. Informatics in Education 23, 2 (2024), 323–360. [35] Ken Kahn and Niall Winters. 2021. Constructionism and AI: A history and possible futures. British Journal of Educational Technology 52, 3 (2021), 1130–1142. doi:10.1111/bjet.13088 [36] Andrej Karpathy. 2024. NanoGPT. https://github.com/karpathy/nanoGPT. [37] Gloria Ashiya Katuka, Srijita Chakraburty, Hyejeong Lee, Sunny Dhama, Toni Earle-Randell, Mehmet Celepkolu, Kristy Elizabeth Boyer, Krista Glazewski, Cindy Hmelo-Silver, and Tom Mcklin. 2024. Integrating Natural Language Processing in Middle School Science Classrooms: An Experience Report. In Proceedings of the 55th ACM Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education V. 1 (Portland, OR, USA) (SIGCSE 2024) .Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 639–645. doi:10.1145/3626252.3630881 [38] F. Megumi Kivuva, Jayne Everson, Camilo Montes De Haro, and Amy J. Ko. 2024. Cultural-Centric Computational Embroidery. In Proceedings of the 55th ACM Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education V. 1 (Portland, OR, USA) (SIGCSE 2024) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 673–679. doi:10.1145/3626252.3630818 [39] Amy J. Ko, Alannah Oleson, Neil Ryan, Yim Register, Benjamin Xie, Mina Tari, Matthew Davidson, Stefania Druga, and Dastyni Loksa. 2020. It is time for more critical CS education . Number 11. Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA. 31–33 pages. doi:10.1145/3424000 [40] Junga Ko and Aeri Song. 2025. Youth perceptions of AI ethics: a Q methodology approach. Ethics & Behavior 35, 6 (2025), 474–491. doi:10.1080/ 10508422.2024.2396582 [41] Victor R. Lee, Victoria Delaney, and Parth Sarin. 2022. Eliciting High School Students’ Conceptions and Intuitions about Algorithmic Bias. In 

Proceedings of the 2022 ACM Conference on International Computing Education Research - Volume 2 (Lugano and Virtual Event, Switzerland) (ICER ’22) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 35–36. doi:10.1145/3501709.3544279 [42] Ziyan Lin and Yun Dai. 2025. Children’s Conceptions of AI, Ethics and Intelligence in China: Evidence from Drawing and Ranking Activities. British Journal of Educational Technology (2025). [43] Marcia C. Linn. 2005. The Knowledge Integration Perspective on Learning and Instruction . Cambridge University Press, 243–264. [44] Duri Long and Brian Magerko. 2020. What is AI Literacy? Competencies and Design Considerations. In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Honolulu, HI, USA) (CHI ’20) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–16. doi:10.1145/3313831.3376727 [45] Maya Malik and Momin M Malik. 2022. Critical technical awakenings. Journal of Social Computing 2, 4 (2022), 365–384. [46] Erik Marx, Clemens Witt, and Thiemo Leonhardt. 2024. Identifying Secondary School Students’ Misconceptions about Machine Learning: An Interview Study. In Proceedings of the 19th WiPSCE Conference on Primary and Secondary Computing Education Research (Munich, Germany) (WiPSCE ’24) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 6, 10 pages. doi:10.1145/3677619.3678114 [47] Michael McCloskey. 2014. Naive theories of motion. In Mental models . Psychology Press, 299–324. [48] Pekka Mertala and Janne Fagerlund. 2024. Finnish 5th and 6th graders’ misconceptions about artificial intelligence. International Journal of Child-Computer Interaction 39 (2024), 100630. [49] Pekka Mertala, Janne Fagerlund, and Oscar Calderon. 2022. Finnish 5th and 6th grade students’ pre-instructional conceptions of artificial intelligence (AI) and their implications for AI literacy education. Computers and Education: Artificial Intelligence 3 (2022), 100095. [50] Luis Morales-Navarro and Yasmin B Kafai. 2024. Investigating Youths’ Everyday Understanding of Machine Learning Applications: a Knowledge-in-Pieces Perspective. Proceeding of the International Conference of the Learning Sciences (2024). [51] Luis Morales-Navarro, Daniel J. Noh, and Yasmin B. Kafai. 2025. High school students building babyGPTs: Engaging in data practices and addressing ethical issues through the construction of generative language models. International Journal of Child-Computer Interaction 45 (2025), 100769. doi:10.1016/j.ijcci.2025.100769 [52] Andreas Mühling and Gregor Große-Bölting. 2023. Novices’ conceptions of machine learning. Computers and Education: Artificial Intelligence 4(2023), 100142. [53] Narges Norouzi, Snigdha Chaturvedi, and Matthew Rutledge. 2020. Lessons Learned from Teaching Machine Learning and Natural Language Processing to High School Students. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence 34, 09 (April 2020), 13397–13403. doi:10.1609/aaai. v34i09.7063 [54] OECD. 2025. Empowering Learners for the Age of AI: An AI Literacy Framework for Primary and Secondary Education . Technical Report. Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), Paris, France. https://ailiteracyframework.org Accessed: 2026-01-11. [55] Viktoriya Olari and Ralf Romeike. 2024. Data-related practices for creating Artificial Intelligence systems in K-12. In Proceedings of the 19th WiPSCE Conference on Primary and Secondary Computing Education Research (Munich, Germany) (WiPSCE ’24) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 5, 10 pages. doi:10.1145/3677619.3678115 [56] Cathy O’neil. 2017. Weapons of math destruction: How big data increases inequality and threatens democracy . Crown, New York, NY. [57] Katarina Pantic, Deborah A. Fields, and Lisa Quirke. 2016. Studying situated learning in a constructionist programming camp: A multimethod microgenetic analysis of one girl’s learning pathway. In Proceedings of the The 15th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children 

(Manchester, United Kingdom) (IDC ’16) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 428–439. doi:10.1145/2930674.2930725 [58] Blakeley H Payne. 2019. An ethics of artificial intelligence curriculum for middle school students. MIT Media Lab Personal Robots Group. Retrieved Oct 10 (2019), 2019. [59] Roy D Pea. 1986. Language-independent conceptual “bugs” in novice programming. Journal of educational computing research 2, 1 (1986), 25–36. Manuscript submitted to ACM 26 Morales-Navarro et al. 

[60] Catherine Petrozzino. 2021. Who pays for ethical debt in AI? AI and Ethics 1, 3 (2021), 205–208. doi:10.1007/s43681-020-00030-3 [61] Thomas M Philip. 2011. An “ideology in pieces” approach to studying change in teachers’ sensemaking about race, racism, and racial justice. 

Cognition and instruction 29, 3 (2011), 297–329. [62] Nicolas Pope and Matti Tedre. 2025. A Teachable Machine for Transformers. In Proceedings of the 25th Koli Calling International Conference on Computing Education Research (Koli Calling ’25) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 50, 3 pages. doi:10.1145/ 3769994.3770061 [63] Inioluwa Deborah Raji, I. Elizabeth Kumar, Aaron Horowitz, and Andrew Selbst. 2022. The Fallacy of AI Functionality. In Proceedings of the 2022 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency (Seoul, Republic of Korea) (FAccT ’22) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 959–972. doi:10.1145/3531146.3533158 [64] Mike Rose. 2005. The mind at work: Valuing the intelligence of the American worker . Penguin. [65] Leah F Rosenbaum, Luis Morales-Navarro, Paulo Blikstein, Emily Oswald, Jie Chao, Yasmin B Kafai, Shiyan Jiang, and Bruce Sherin. 2024. Knowledge in New Pieces (KiNP): Exploring Diverse Areas of Contemporary Youths’ Intuitive Technosocial Knowledge. In Proceedings of the 18th International Conference of the Learning Sciences-ICLS 2024, pp. 1942-1948 . International Society of the Learning Sciences. [66] Michael T Rücker and Niels Pinkwart. 2016. Review and discussion of children’s conceptions of computers. Journal of Science Education and Technology 25 (2016), 274–283. [67] Jean Salac, Rotem Landesman, Stefania Druga, and Amy J Ko. 2023. Scaffolding Children’s Sensemaking around Algorithmic Fairness. In Proceedings of the 22nd Annual ACM Interaction Design and Children Conference . , , 137–149. [68] Jean Salac, Alannah Oleson, Lena Armstrong, Audrey Le Meur, and Amy J. Ko. 2023. Funds of Knowledge used by Adolescents of Color in Scaffolded Sensemaking around Algorithmic Fairness. In Proceedings of the 2023 ACM Conference on International Computing Education Research - Volume 1 

(Chicago, IL, USA) (ICER ’23) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 191–205. doi:10.1145/3568813.3600110 [69] Marie-Monique Schaper, Mariana Aki Tamashiro, Rachel Charlotte Smith, Maarten Van Mechelen, and Ole Sejer Iversen. 2023. Five design recommendations for teaching teenagers’ about artificial intelligence and machine learning. In Proceedings of the 22nd annual ACM interaction design and children conference . 298–309. [70] Jessica M Silbey and Woodrow Hartzog. 2025. AI Slop. (2025). [71] John P Smith, Andrea A diSessa, and Jeremy Roschelle. 1994. Misconceptions reconceived: A constructivist analysis of knowledge in transition. The journal of the learning sciences 3, 2 (1994), 115–163. [72] Rachel Charlotte Smith, Marie-Monique Schaper, Mariana Aki Tamashiro, Maarten Van Mechelen, Marianne Graves Petersen, and Ole Sejer Iversen. 2023. A research agenda for computational empowerment for emerging technology education. International Journal of Child-Computer Interaction 

38 (2023), 100616. [73] Jaemarie Solyst, Chloe Fong, Faisal Nurdin, Rotem Landesman, and R. Benjamin Shapiro. 2025. "Grillz on a hijabi": Intersectional Identities in Fostering Critical AI Literacy. In Proceedings of the 25th Koli Calling International Conference on Computing Education Research (Koli Calling ’25) .Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 3, 11 pages. doi:10.1145/3769994.3770037 [74] Jaemarie Solyst, Ellia Yang, Shixian Xie, Jessica Hammer, Amy Ogan, and Motahhare Eslami. 2024. Children’s Overtrust and Shifting Perspectives of Generative AI. In Proceedings of the 18th International Conference of the Learning Sciences (ICLS) 2024 . International Society of the Learning Sciences, 905–912. doi:10.22318/icls2024.307401 [75] Jaemarie Solyst, Ellia Yang, Shixian Xie, Amy Ogan, Jessica Hammer, and Motahhare Eslami. 2023. The Potential of Diverse Youth as Stakeholders in Identifying and Mitigating Algorithmic Bias for a Future of Fairer AI. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 7, CSCW2 (2023), 1–27. [76] Jessica M Szczuka, Clara Strathmann, Natalia Szymczyk, Lina Mavrina, and Nicole C Krämer. 2022. How do children acquire knowledge about voice assistants? A longitudinal field study on children’s knowledge about how voice assistants store and process data. International Journal of Child-Computer Interaction 33 (2022), 100460. [77] David Touretzky, Christina Gardner-McCune, Fred Martin, and Deborah Seehorn. 2019. Envisioning AI for K-12: What should every child know about AI?. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence , Vol. 33. 9795–9799. [78] David Touretzky, Christina Gardner-McCune, and Deborah Seehorn. 2023. Machine learning and the five big ideas in AI. International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education 33, 2 (2023), 233–266. doi:10.1007/s40593-022-00314-1 [79] Tiffany Tseng, Coram Bryant, and Paulo Blikstein. 2011. Collaboration through documentation: automated capturing of tangible constructions to support engineering design. In Proceedings of the 10th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children (Ann Arbor, Michigan) (IDC ’11) .Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 118–126. doi:10.1145/1999030.1999044 [80] Tiffany Tseng, Matt J. Davidson, Luis Morales-Navarro, Jennifer King Chen, Victoria Delaney, Mark Leibowitz, Jazbo Beason, and R. Benjamin Shapiro. 2024. Co-ML: Collaborative Machine Learning Model Building for Developing Dataset Design Practices. ACM Trans. Comput. Educ. 24, 2, Article 25 (April 2024), 37 pages. doi:10.1145/3641552 [81] Jessica Van Brummelen, Viktoriya Tabunshchyk, and Tommy Heng. 2021. “Alexa, can I program you?”: Student perceptions of conversational artificial intelligence before and after programming Alexa. In Proceedings of the 20th Annual ACM Interaction Design and Children Conference .305–313. [82] Henriikka Vartiainen, Tapani Toivonen, Ilkka Jormanainen, Juho Kahila, Matti Tedre, and Teemu Valtonen. 2021. Machine learning for middle schoolers: Learning through data-driven design. International Journal of Child-Computer Interaction 29 (2021), 100281. doi:10.1016/j.ijcci.2021.100281 Manuscript submitted to ACM Building to Understand 27 

[83] Annemiek Veldhuis, Priscilla Y Lo, Sadhbh Kenny, and Alissa N Antle. 2025. Critical Artificial Intelligence literacy: A scoping review and framework synthesis. International Journal of Child-Computer Interaction 43 (2025), 100708. [84] Stella Vosniadou. 2019. The development of students’ understanding of science. In Frontiers in Education , Vol. 4. Frontiers Media SA, 32. [85] Randi Williams, Safinah Ali, Nisha Devasia, Daniella DiPaola, Jenna Hong, Stephen P Kaputsos, Brian Jordan, and Cynthia Breazeal. 2023. AI+ ethics curricula for middle school youth: Lessons learned from three project-based curricula. International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education 33, 2 (2023), 325–383. [86] Randi Williams, Hae Won Park, and Cynthia Breazeal. 2019. A is for artificial intelligence: the impact of artificial intelligence activities on young children’s perceptions of robots. In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems . 1–11. [87] Randi Williams, Hae Won Park, Lauren Oh, and Cynthia Breazeal. 2019. PopBots: Designing an Artificial Intelligence Curriculum for Early Childhood Education. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , Vol. 33. 9729–9736. doi:10.1609/aaai.v33i01.33019729 [88] Simon Willison. 2023. NanoGPT Shakespeare on an M2 MacBook Pro. https://til.simonwillison.net/llms/nanogpt-shakespeare-m2 Accessed: 2025-01-26. [89] Jason Yip, Tamara Clegg, Elizabeth Bonsignore, Helene Gelderblom, Emily Rhodes, and Allison Druin. 2013. Brownies or bags-of-stuff? domain expertise in cooperative inquiry with children. In Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children (New York, New York, USA) (IDC ’13) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 201–210. doi:10.1145/2485760.2485763 [90] Abigail Zimmermann-Niefield, Shawn Polson, Celeste Moreno, and R. Benjamin Shapiro. 2020. Youth making machine learning models for gesture-controlled interactive media. In Proceedings of the Interaction Design and Children Conference . ACM, London United Kingdom, 63–74. doi:10.1145/3392063.3394438 Manuscript submitted to ACM 28 Morales-Navarro et al. 

Received 20 February 2007; revised 12 March 2009; accepted 5 June 2009