Title: Mechanized Foundations of Structural Governance: Machine-Checked Proofs for Governed Intelligence

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.27289v1

Published Time: Fri, 01 May 2026 00:24:39 GMT

Number of Pages: 27

Markdown Content:
# Mechanized Foundations of Structural Governance: Machine-Checked Proofs for Governed Intelligence 

Alan L. McCann 

Mashin, Inc. 

research@mashin.live 

April 2026 

Abstract 

We present five results in the theory of structural governance for cognitive workflow systems. Three are mechanized in Coq 8.19 using the Interaction Trees library with parameterized coinduction; two are proved on paper with explicit reductions. The Coinductive Safety Predicate (gov safe ) is a coinductive property that captures governance safety for infinite program behaviors, indexed by a boolean permission flag that is provably false for ungoverned I/O and true for governed interpretations (mechanized). The Governance Invariance Theorem 

establishes that governance is uniform across the meta-recursive tower: governance at level 

n + 1 reduces to governance at level n by definitional equality of the type (mechanized). The 

Sufficiency Theorem proves that four atomic primitives (code, reason, memory, call) are expressively complete for any discrete intelligent system, formalized as compositional closure of a Kleisli category (mechanized). The Alternating Normal Form provides a canonical decomposition of any machine into alternating code and effect layers, with a confluent rewriting system (paper proof). The Necessity Theorem proves via explicit reduction to Rice’s theorem that an architecturally opaque component (the reason primitive) is mathematically necessary for problems requiring semantic judgment (paper proof). A sixth contribution connects the abstract model to the deployed runtime: the Verified Interpreter Specification formalizes the BEAM runtime’s trust, capability, and hash chain logic in Coq, then tests the running system against this specification using property-based testing with over 70,000 randomly generated directive sequences and zero disagreements. The process immediately discovered and fixed a latent capability-tree bug that unit testing had missed. The mechanization comprises approximately 12,000 lines across 36 modules with 454 theorems and zero admitted lemmas. Recent modules establish Governed Cognitive Completeness : a single architecture simultaneously achieves Turing completeness, oracle integration, decidability self-awareness, goal reachability, cognitive architecture completeness, and subsumption of content governance. A companion paper McCann [2026b] develops this capstone result in detail. 

# 1 Introduction 

This paper presents five foundational results in the theory of structural governance for cognitive workflow systems. Three are fully mechanized in Coq 8.19 with zero admitted lemmas; two are proved on paper with explicit reductions. All five are stated precisely and proved in full. Six additional modules extend these foundations to establish Governed Cognitive Completeness, a capstone result developed in a companion paper McCann [2026b]. 1

> arXiv:2604.27289v1 [cs.AI] 30 Apr 2026

What is novel. The individual proof techniques—interaction trees, parameterized coinduction, Kleisli categories, register machine simulation—are established. The originality lies in their synthesis: applying coinductive reasoning to AI workflow governance, proving Turing completeness inside 

a governance-enforcing interpretation, and connecting categorical closure to a mechanized safety predicate. No prior work, to our knowledge, has formalized governance properties of AI workflow systems in a proof assistant. The five results formalize properties of the Mashin cognitive workflow system, drawing on prior work McCann [2026e]: 1. The Coinductive Safety Predicate (gov safe ). A coinductive predicate over interaction trees that captures whether a program performs I/O only under governance authorization. Indexed by a boolean permission flag. Provably false for bare I/O. Provably true for governed interpretations. (Section 3) 2. Governance Invariance Theorem . Governance holds at every level of meta-recursive composition. The type machine at level n R is definitionally itree DirectiveE R for all n, so governance is uniform across the tower by construction. The simplicity of the proof is the point: the type system does the work. (Section 4) 3. Sufficiency Theorem . Four primitives (code, reason, memory, call) are expressively complete: they form a closed category, simulate any Turing machine, and surject onto established cognitive architecture models. (Section 5) 4. The Alternating Normal Form (paper proof). Every machine decomposes into a canon-ical arrangement of alternating code and effect layers. The decomposition is unique up to associativity, monoidal coherence, and code fusion. (Section 6) 5. Necessity Theorem (paper proof). An architecturally opaque component (the reason primi-tive) is mathematically necessary. No finite extension of transparent computable primitives can replace it. The proof is an explicit reduction to Rice’s theorem. (Section 7) A sixth contribution, the Verified Interpreter Specification (Section 9), connects the abstract model to the deployed BEAM runtime. Three new Coq modules formalize the trust, capability, and hash chain logic, with bridge theorems proving that the specification refines gov safe . Property-based tests then compare the BEAM runtime against this specification. The process discovered a real capability-tree bug on its 188th random input. 

Why machine-checked proofs matter. A paper proof can have subtle errors that reviewers miss. A sign flipped in a subscript. An implicit assumption that seemed obvious but was not. A step that “clearly follows” except it does not. Mathematicians find errors in published proofs years after publication, sometimes decades. Coq does not care about reputation, funding, or deadlines. It checks the math. If the math is wrong, it says so. If it compiles without errors, every theorem is correct. Not probably correct. Correct. The distinction between testing and proof matters here. A test says “it worked this time.” A Coq proof says “it works every time, for every program, forever.” When the governance claim is “every effect is governed,” testing can show that the effects you checked were governed. Verification proves that all effects—including the ones in programs that have not been written yet—are governed. 2Scope and companion papers. This paper presents the mechanized proof infrastructure and the five foundational results. It does not address the expressiveness consequences, the algebraic generalization, or the practical enforcement mechanisms, which are developed in companion papers. McCann [2026b] extends these foundations with semantic transparency and expressive minimality results, proving that governance preserves observational equivalence and that the four primitives are minimal. McCann [2026a] lifts the system-specific results to a parametric algebraic semantics: a three-axiom GovernanceAlgebra inducing a symmetric monoidal category, with extraction of the governance kernel to a verified OCaml NIF. McCann [2026d] discharges the pure module constraint assumed by the safety theorems, replacing module-level enforcement with WASM compilation and cryptographic purity certificates. McCann [2026c] extends the governance boundary to the supply chain with dual-signature distribution provenance. 

The Interaction Trees framework. All formalizations use the Interaction Trees library Xia et al. [2020], which represents programs as coinductive trees where each node is a pure value ( Ret ), a silent computation step ( Tau ), or a visible event ( Vis ). The governance pipeline transforms a tree of directive events into a tree of governed events. Coinductive properties of these infinite structures are proved using the paco library Hur et al. [2013] for parameterized coinduction. 

# 2 Background 

2.1 Interaction Trees 

An interaction tree Xia et al. [2020] over event type E with return type R is a coinductive data structure: itree E R ::= Ret( v) | Tau( t) | Vis( e, k )where v : R, t : itree E R , e : E X for some response type X, and k : X → itree E R . The structure forms a monad with: 

• Return : ret( v) = Ret( v)

• Bind : t > >= k substitutes continuations through the tree, threading results forward The monad laws (left identity, right identity, associativity) hold up to observational equivalence (≈τ , written eutt in the Coq development). 

2.2 Event Types 

The Mashin formalization defines three event types: 

• DirectiveE : the 14 directive constructors (LLMCall, MemoryOp, CallMachine, HTTPRequest, GraphQLRequest, WebSocketOp, MCPCall, etc.) that executor programs emit 

• IOE: actual I/O effects performed by the runtime 

• GovIOE = GovE +′ IOE : governed I/O, where GovE carries governance stage tags (TrustCheck, PermissionCheck, PhaseValidation, PreHooks, Guardrails, ProvenanceRecord, EventBroad-cast) A pure executor program has type itree DirectiveE R: it can only emit directives, never I/O directly. 32.3 The Governance Operator 

The governance operator G transforms a base handler h : DirectiveE ⇝ itree IOE into a governed handler G(h) : DirectiveE ⇝ itree GovIOE by wrapping each directive with pre-governance checks (4 stages) and post-governance recording (3 stages):                                  

> Definition Gov ( h :base_handler ) :governed_handler := fun R( d :DirectiveE R ) = > ITree . bind pre_governance ( fun ok = > if ok then ITree . bind ( lift_io ( h Rd ) ) ( fun r= > ITree . bind post_governance ( fun _= > ret r ) ) else ITree . spin ) .

If any pre-governance check fails, the system diverges ( spin ): no I/O is performed, no effects escape. This is correct by design: a denied directive produces no effects. 

2.4 Parameterized Coinduction 

Ordinary induction proves properties of finite structures. Programs run forever. The paco library Hur et al. [2013] provides parameterized coinduction: prove a property holds for one step, show that holding-for-one-step implies holding-for-the-next-step. The library manages the coinductive hypoth-esis automatically, preventing common errors in manual coinductive proofs (guardedness violations, weak hypotheses). 

# 3 The Coinductive Safety Predicate 

3.1 Definition 

The Coinductive Safety Predicate captures the semantic content of structural governance as a coinductive property of interaction trees. 

Definition 3.1 (Coinductive Safety Predicate) . The predicate gov safe : bool → itree GovIOE R →

Prop is the greatest fixed point of the generating functor: 

gov safe b (Ret v) always 

gov safe b (Tau t) iff gov safe b t 

gov safe b (Vis (inl 1 (GovCheck s)) k) iff ∀r. gov safe true ( k r )

gov safe true (Vis (inr 1 e) k) iff ∀x. gov safe true ( k x )Note the absence of a constructor for gov safe false (Vis (inr 1 e) k). I/O events are permitted only when the boolean flag is true (governance has been checked). Governance events ( GovE ) set the flag to true regardless of its current value. In Coq:                                       

> Variant gov_safeF ( F :bool -> itree GovIOE R-> Prop ) :bool -> itreeF GovIOE R( itree GovIOE R ) -> Prop := |GS_Ret :forall allowed r , gov_safeF Fallowed ( RetF r ) |GS_Tau :forall allowed t , Fallowed t->

4gov_safeF F allowed ( TauF t ) | GS_GovE : forall allowed ( s : GovernanceStage ) k , ( forall b : bool , F true ( k b ) ) -> gov_safeF F allowed ( VisF ( inl1 ( GovCheck s ) ) k ) | GS_IOE : forall ( X : Type ) ( e : IOE X ) ( k : X -> itree GovIOE R ) , ( forall x : X , F true ( k x ) ) -> gov_safeF F true ( VisF ( inr1 e ) k ) . Definition gov_safe : bool -> itree GovIOE R -> Prop := paco2 gov_safe_ bot2 . 

3.2 Non-Triviality 

The predicate has teeth. It rejects what it should reject and accepts what it should accept. 

Lemma 3.2 (Bare I/O is unsafe) . For any I/O event e and continuation k, ¬ gov safe false ( Vis ( inr 1 e) k).Proof. By inversion on the gov safeF generating functor. The constructor GS IOE requires the boolean index to be true. At false, no constructor matches. Three lines of Coq:                                   

> Lemma bare_io_not_safe :forall ( e :IOE R ) ( k :R-> itree GovIOE R ) , ~gov_safe false ( Vis ( inr1 e ) k ) . Proof . intros ekH . punfold H . red in H . cbn in H . inv H . Qed .

These three lines are the most important in the entire development. They prove that the predicate is not vacuously true. A predicate that accepts everything proves nothing. 

Lemma 3.3 (Upward closure) . If gov safe false t, then gov safe true t. A tree that never does bare I/O is also safe when I/O is permitted. 

3.3 Main Safety Theorem 

Theorem 3.4 (Governed Interpretation Safety) . For any base handler h, any pure executor program 

t : itree DirectiveE R, and any boolean b:

gov safe b (interp( G(h), t )) 

Proof. By parameterized coinduction on the structure of t. The proof is 213 lines of Coq with nested pcofix .

Case Ret: Trivially safe ( GS Ret ). 

Case Tau: One computation step, then the coinductive hypothesis applies ( GS Tau + CIH ). 

Case Vis d k : The G pipeline unfolds as: 1. Four pre-governance GovE events (TrustCheck, PermissionCheck, PhaseValidation, PreHooks). Each applies GS GovE , setting the permission flag to true. 2. If all pass: the base handler runs via translate inr 1, producing IOE events. These apply 

GS IOE , which is valid because the flag is now true . A nested coinduction ( CIH2 ) handles the inner I/O tree. 53. Three post-governance GovE events (Guardrails, ProvenanceRecord, EventBroadcast). Each applies GS GovE .4. A Tau step back to interp( G(h), k result), where the outer coinductive hypothesis applies. Denied branches (any governance check returns false) produce spin , which is vacuously safe: it never reaches a Vis node, so the predicate holds trivially. Combined with Lemma 3.2, this establishes the mathematical content of structural governance: 

• Programs that bypass governance fail the predicate 

• Programs interpreted through G satisfy the predicate 

• The gap between these two results is structural governance 

# 4 Governance Invariance Theorem 

4.1 The Meta-Recursive Tower 

A machine can introspect other machines. A governor machine monitors an executor machine. A meta-governor monitors the governor. This creates a tower of governance levels: Level 0: executor programs Level 1: machines that call Level 0 machines Level n: machines that call Level n − 1 machines The question: does governance hold at every level? Or does some level escape? 

Definition 4.1 (Machine at Level n). machine at level n R := itree DirectiveE R.The definition is the same for every n. This is the insight. 

Definition 4.2 (Governed) . A machine t is governed under handler h if gov safe false ( interp (G(h), t )). 

4.2 The Theorem 

Theorem 4.3 (Governance Invariance Theorem) . For all n ≥ 0, all types R, and all t : machine at level n R :

t is governed. Proof. By induction on n.

Base case (n = 0): Apply Theorem 3.4. 

Inductive step : A Level n + 1 machine has type itree DirectiveE R, which is definitionally equal to machine at level n R . Apply Theorem 3.4 directly. The proof is deliberately simple. The substance is that machine at level n R is definitionally itree DirectiveE R for all n. The level index tracks meta-recursive depth for reasoning but does not change the type. Governance is uniform across the tower because the type system enforces it. This is a design achievement, not a deep mathematical one: the architecture was constructed so that governance invariance would be trivial to prove. A complex proof here would indicate a flaw in the architecture, not additional sophistication. 

Corollary 4.4 (Fixed Point) . The union Ω = S 

> n≥0

Level (n) is governed. Adding another level produces no new ungoverned machines. 

6Proof. Ω is itree DirectiveE R. Apply Theorem 3.4. 

Corollary 4.5 (Governance Composition) . Governance distributes over sequential composition: 

interp( G(h), t > >= k) ≈ interp( G(h), t ) >>= ( λx. interp( G(h), k x )) 

Proof. This is interp bind from the Interaction Trees library. 

# 5 Sufficiency Theorem 

5.1 Category Mashin 

Definition 5.1 (Category Mashin ). The Kleisli category of the itree DirectiveE monad: 

• Objects : Types (context types) 

• Morphisms : Kleisli arrows f : A → itree DirectiveE B

• Composition : f ≫ g = λa. f (a) >>= g

• Identity : id = λa. ret( a)In Coq:                                                   

> Definition mashin_morphism ( A B:Type ) :Type := A-> itree DirectiveE B . Definition mashin_id { A :Type } :mashin_morphism AA:= fun a= > ret a . Definition mashin_compose { A BC:Type } ( f :mashin_morphism AB ) ( g :mashin_morphism BC ) :mashin_morphism AC:= fun a= > ITree . bind ( f a ) g .

5.2 Category Axioms 

The category axioms are the monad laws, proved in the ITrees library:                                       

> Lemma mashin_left_id :... bind ( ret x ) k$\ approx $kx . Lemma mashin_right_id :... bind tret $\ approx $t . Lemma mashin_assoc :... bind ( bind tk1 ) k2
> $\ approx $bind t( fun x= > bind ( k1 x ) k2 ) .

5.3 The Four Primitives 

The four primitives are specific patterns of interaction trees: 

• code : λa. ret( f (a)) — pure computation, no events 

• reason : triggers LLMCall — oracle-mediated inference 

• memory : triggers MemoryOp — persistent semantic storage 

• call : triggers CallMachine — recursive governed machine invocation 75.4 Compositional Closure 

Lemma 5.2 (Closure) . Category Mashin is closed under sequential composition, branching, and bounded iteration. Every composition produces a well-typed itree DirectiveE morphism. 

5.5 Turing Completeness 

Theorem 5.3 (Sufficiency Theorem — Turing Completeness) . The primitive subset {code , memory , call }

is Turing-complete. Proof. By constructive simulation of a register machine (counter machine, Turing-equivalent per Minsky Minsky [1967]). The encoding maps: 

• Registers → memory operations (MemRecall, MemStore) 

• Arithmetic → pure computation ( code morphisms) 

• Instruction sequencing → recursive structure ( call morphisms) 

• Conditional branching → case analysis on recalled values The register machine is defined as:                        

> Inductive instruction :Type := |INC :reg_id -> label -> instruction |DEC :reg_id -> label -> label -> instruction |HALT :instruction .

The translation function translate program maps each instruction to a composition of DirectiveE events. 

Simulation correctness. We prove behavioral equivalence at two levels: 

Level 1: Denotational. The pure denotation denote program computes the same result as the reference register machine semantics rm run :                        

> Theorem simulation_correct :forall ( p :program ) ( fuel :nat ) ( pc :label ) ( regs :reg_state ) , denote_program pfuel pc regs =rm_run pfuel ( pc , regs ) .

This is a Leibniz equality, not just observational equivalence. 

Level 2: Operational. Under abstract handler hypotheses (memory recall returns the correct value, memory store updates correctly, evaluation distributes over bind), the interaction tree translation matches rm run :                                    

> Corollary translation_faithful :forall ( p :program ) ( fuel :nat ) ( pc :label ) ( m :mem ) ( regs :reg_state ) , mem_corresponds mregs -> exists m ’ , eval_mem m( translate_program pfuel pc ) =(m ’ , tt ) /\ mem_corresponds m ’ ( snd ( rm_run pfuel ( pc , regs ) ) ) .

85.6 Governed Turing Completeness 

Theorem 5.4. All translated register machine programs satisfy gov safe :                   

> Theorem governed_turing_completeness :forall ( h :base_handler ) ( p :program ) ( fuel :nat ) , gov_safe false ( interp ( Gov h ) ( translate_program pfuel 0) ) .

This is the strongest form of the sufficiency result: Turing completeness is achieved within the governed architecture. Every computation a Turing machine can perform, the governed primitive set can also perform, and governance holds throughout. 

5.7 Governance Safety of All Morphisms 

Theorem 5.5. Every morphism in Mashin , when interpreted through G(h), satisfies gov safe :                    

> Theorem mashin_morphism_governed :forall ( A B:Type ) ( f :mashin_morphism AB ) ( a :A ) , gov_safe false ( interp ( Gov h ) ( f a ) ) .

This connects the categorical structure to the governance safety predicate: expressiveness and governance are not a tradeoff. They are the same structure viewed from two angles. 

5.8 Coterminous Governance 

The Safety Theorem (Section 3) proves that every program, when interpreted through G(h), has all its effects governed. The governance boundary contains the expressiveness boundary. The Sufficiency Theorem (this section) proves that the four primitives can express any discrete intelligent system, including Turing-complete computation within the governed architecture. The expressiveness boundary contains the governance boundary. 

Corollary 5.6 (Coterminous Governance) . The expressiveness boundary and the governance boundary are identical. Formally: (i) Safety ⇒ Governance ⊇ Expressiveness. By governed interp safe (Section 3): for any pure executor program t and base handler h, gov safe false (interp (G h) t) holds. Every expressible program is governed. (ii) Sufficiency ⇒ Expressiveness ⊇ Governance. By governed turing completeness (this section): the primitives can simulate any register machine (Turing-complete computation) and the category Mashin is closed under composition. For every governance policy, there exists a program that exercises the capability the policy governs. (iii) Two sets, each containing the other, are equal. Expressiveness = Governance. 

Definition 5.7 (Coterminous Governance, portable) . A system S satisfies coterminous governance 

if: (1) every effect expressible in S passes through a governance boundary G (Safety), and (2) the primitives of S are expressively complete for the class of computations S targets (Suffi-ciency). 9The expressiveness boundary of S equals the governance boundary of S.This definition is system-agnostic. It does not depend on any particular runtime, language, or architecture. Any system satisfying both conditions has coterminous governance. The preceding theorems prove that the governance algebra presented in this paper satisfies both conditions. 

# 6 The Alternating Normal Form 

Definition 6.1 (Alternating Normal Form) . A morphism f : A → B in Mashin is in Alternating Normal Form if it has the shape: 

f ∼= c0 ≫ (s1 ≫ c1) ≫ (s2 ≫ c2) ≫ · · · ≫ (sn ≫ cn)where each ci is a code morphism (pure computation) and each si is one of {reason , memory , call }

or a control flow combinator applied to sub-machines in normal form. 

Theorem 6.2 (Alternating Normal Form Existence) . Every morphism f : A → B in Mashin can be reduced to Alternating Normal Form. The normal form is unique up to: (i) Associativity of sequential composition (ii) Monoidal coherence isomorphisms (iii) Fusion of adjacent code morphisms ( c ≫ c′ 7 → c ◦ c′)Proof. Three rewriting rules applied exhaustively: 1. Code fusion : adjacent code morphisms c1 ≫ c2 7 → c1 ◦ c2

2. Code hoisting : extract predicate computation from branch combinators as a code morphism prefix 3. Identity elimination : remove identity morphisms from compositions 

Termination. Lexicographic ordering on (weight, nesting depth). Code fusion decreases weight. Code hoisting decreases nesting depth at constant weight. Identity elimination decreases weight. Since the measure is a natural number, the rewriting terminates. 

Confluence. The three rules have non-overlapping left-hand sides (code fusion applies to 

c1 ≫ c2, code hoisting applies to branch p(f, g ), identity elimination applies to id ≫ f or f ≫ id ). The single potential overlap—identity elimination and code fusion when c1 = id —is joinable: both produce c2. By the critical pair lemma, the system is confluent. The Alternating Normal Form provides a canonical representation for program analysis. Any machine, regardless of how it was constructed, can be decomposed into an alternating sequence of computation and effect. This decomposition is the structural analog of separating pure functions from side effects in functional programming. 10 7 Necessity Theorem 

The previous sections established that four primitives are sufficient . This section proves that the 

reason primitive is necessary : no purely computable extension can replace it. 

Theorem 7.1 (Necessity Theorem) . For any non-trivial extensional property of program outputs, no computable function can replace the architecturally opaque component (the reason primitive) for all instances. The opaque component is mathematically necessary. Proof. By explicit reduction to Rice’s theorem Rice [1953]. 

The language. The reason primitive accepts natural-language prompts and produces natural-language responses. Its input domain is the set of all finite strings. Its output domain is the set of all finite strings. A “replacement” for the reason primitive would be a computable function 

f : Σ ∗ → Σ∗ that, for any prompt, produces a response adequate for the semantic task the prompt describes. 

The semantic property. Define property C as follows: a computable function f has property 

C if and only if, for all prompts p describing a factual question about the world, f (p) returns a factually correct answer. C is the property “this function answers factual questions correctly.” 

C is extensional in the Rice sense: it depends on what f computes (its input-output behavior), not on the source code of f . Two programs that compute the same function either both satisfy C

or neither does. This is the definition of extensionality in computability theory. 

C is non-trivial: the constant function that always returns “yes” does not have C (it answers “Is 2+2=5?” incorrectly). A lookup table over a finite question set could have C for those questions. Some computable functions satisfy C for some inputs. No computable function satisfies C for all inputs, as we now show. 

The Rice reduction. Rice’s theorem (1953) states: for any non-trivial extensional property Q

of computable functions, the set {i : φi has property Q} is undecidable, where φi is the i-th partial computable function under a standard G¨ odel numbering. The proof is by reduction from the halting problem and applies to any Turing-complete model of computation. 

C is non-trivial and extensional. Therefore, by Rice’s theorem, no algorithm can decide whether an arbitrary computable function has property C. No algorithm can determine, given the index of a computable function, whether that function answers factual questions correctly. 

The necessity argument. Suppose, for contradiction, that a computable function f could replace the reason primitive for all semantic tasks. Then f is a computable function that answers factual questions correctly (among other semantic tasks). But f ’s own correctness is a non-trivial extensional property. By Rice’s theorem, no algorithm can verify that f has this property. More directly: if f could replace the oracle for all semantic tasks, then f could decide whether arbitrary programs have property C (by simulating them on test inputs and judging the outputs). But deciding C is undecidable. Contradiction. Therefore no single computable function can replace the 

reason primitive for all semantic tasks. 

Corollary 7.2 (Permanence of the Boundary) . No finite extension of computable primitives elimi-nates the need for an architecturally opaque component. The boundary is a theorem of computability theory, not a technological limitation. 

Addressing potential objections. “Governance in your architecture is syntactic, not semantic.” 

Correct. The Safety Theorem (Section 3) proves that structural governance, whether a directive passes through the governed boundary, is decidable by construction. The Necessity Theorem is not about structural governance. It is about semantic judgment: Is this output correct? Is this policy 11 appropriate? Should trust be escalated? These are questions that require evaluating the relationship between the system’s outputs and the external world. Structural governance is decidable. Semantic evaluation of what passes through governance is not. The two operate at different levels, and Rice applies to the second, not the first. 

“Your architecture restricts expressiveness enough to avoid Rice.” The pure computation layer does restrict expressiveness (no I/O). But the Necessity Theorem does not claim that Rice applies to the pure computation layer. It claims that the semantic tasks the system must perform (judging correctness, evaluating policy fitness, assessing trust) are undecidable. These tasks involve the relationship between the system’s outputs and the external world, a relationship that no restriction of the computation layer can make decidable, because the world is not a formal system. 

“The property is not extensional in the Rice sense.” C as defined above is extensional: it depends only on the function’s input-output behavior (what it returns for each prompt), not on the program text. Two programs that compute the same function either both satisfy C or neither does. This is the definition of extensionality in computability theory. 

Remark 7.3 (The Achilles’ Heel That Is Not) . A critic might observe: “Someone could construct a Turing-complete system with total structural governance but no opaque oracle. Does that invalidate the Necessity Theorem?” It does not, because the Necessity Theorem is not about structural governance. Someone can 

build total structural governance without an oracle. They cannot build a system that judges its own outputs correctly without one. The theorem concerns what the system can decide about itself , not whether effects are routed through a boundary. Structural governance (routing all effects through a checked boundary) is decidable by construction; this is what the Safety Theorem proves. Semantic judgment (determining whether a given output is correct, whether a policy is appropriate, whether trust should be escalated) is undecidable; this is what the Necessity Theorem proves. The two results operate at different levels. Conflating them misidentifies the claim. 

What the theorem proves and what it does not. The theorem proves that any system restricted to computable primitives whose behavior is fully determined by their source code cannot solve AI-complete problems. It does not prove necessity of hypercomputation: genuine access to functions outside the computable hierarchy. The distinction matters because large language models are computable; they are deterministic functions on finite inputs, implemented as matrix multiplications over fixed weights. The architectural consequence is more precise than the oracle metaphor suggests. What the 

reason primitive provides is architectural opacity : a component whose input-output behavior cannot be statically determined by the system that invokes it. Rice’s theorem proves that this opacity is necessary: any system that could fully analyze its own reason component would be able to decide non-trivial semantic properties, which is impossible. The system must treat some component as a black box. In the formal model, reason is modeled as oracle access because the proof requires a component whose behavior is not derivable from the system’s own computational primitives. In practice, LLMs satisfy this requirement not because they are oracles but because they are opaque: the governing system cannot predict their outputs from first principles. The formal guarantee holds regardless of what fills the oracle role. As the quality of the opaque component improves (better models), system capability improves without architectural change. 12 8 The Mechanization 

8.1 Trusted Computing Base 

The mechanized proofs establish properties of a formal model. The guarantees hold relative to the following trusted computing base (TCB): 1. Coq’s kernel. The Calculus of Inductive Constructions and Coq’s type checker are trusted. This is the standard TCB for all Coq developments (CompCert Leroy [2009], CertiKOS Gu et al. [2016], Vellvm Zakowski et al. [2021]). 2. The ITrees and paco libraries. We trust the interaction tree representation and the parameterized coinduction infrastructure. Both are widely used and peer-reviewed. 3. Faithful runtime implementation. The proofs assume that the deployed runtime correctly implements the governance operator G, the directive event type DirectiveE , and the interpre-tation pipeline interp . If the runtime deviates from the formal model, the guarantees do not transfer. This gap is addressed by three complementary mechanisms. First, the Verified Interpreter Specification (Section 9): a Coq formalization of the runtime’s trust, capability, and hash chain logic, tested against the BEAM runtime using property-based testing with over 70,000 randomly generated directive sequences and zero disagreements. Second, 36 conformance tests map one-to-one to Coq theorems (TrustSpec.v, HashChainSpec.v, InterpreterSpec.v), verifying that specific proved properties hold in the runtime. Third, the extraction pipeline brings proved Coq code into the BEAM runtime as the Kore governance kernel, so governance decisions execute through proved code rather than a reimplementation. A separate development McCann [2026d] further hardens this TCB by proving effect separation for the executor layer. The methodology immediately discovered a latent capability-tree bug that unit testing had missed (Section 9.4). The bridge methodology follows seL4 Klein et al. [2009] and Amazon s2n Chudnov et al. [2018]. No production system of comparable complexity has end-to-end formal verification of the runtime itself; the standard approach is specification testing plus extraction where possible, which is what we provide. 4. No hidden effects. The model assumes that all effects are mediated through the event types. Side channels, hardware faults, or compromised execution environments are outside the model’s scope. These assumptions are standard for mechanized verification of systems software. The proofs guarantee that if the runtime faithfully implements the model, then governance holds for all programs. The correspondence between model and implementation is established through property-based testing (70,000+ inputs, 0 disagreements), conformance tests (36 tests mapping to Coq theorems), and the extraction pipeline (Kore governance kernel runs proved code). This follows the standard methodology for verified systems software. 13 8.2 Infrastructure 

Component Version Coq 8.19.2 Interaction Trees 5.2.1 paco 4.2.3 ExtLib 0.13.0 

Artifact availability. The complete Coq development (36 modules, 454 theorems, zero admitted lemmas) is available at https://github.com/mashin-live/governance-proofs under the MIT license. The repository includes build instructions and continuous integration that verifies all proofs compile and contain no admitted lemmas. 14 8.3 Module Structure 

Module Content Lines 

Prelude.v Imports and common notation 31 

Directives.v DirectiveE event type (14 constructors) 245 

Governance.v Gov operator, pre/post governance 200 

Interpreter.v Naturality, governance transparency 187 

Functor.v Gov endofunctor, functor laws 304 

Safety.v Coinductive Safety Predicate, main theorem 507 

Convergence.v Governance Invariance Theorem 141 

Category.v Category Mashin , closure, safety 343 

Completeness.v Register machine, simulation, Turing 684 

TrustSpec.v Trust levels, capability model 364 

HashChainSpec.v Abstract hash chain properties 222 

InterpreterSpec.v Verified interpreter specification 480 

Governed Cognitive Completeness (Section 11) 

Subsumption.v Structural/content governance asymmetry 233 

CognitiveArchitecture.v Cognitive capability surjection 371 

Oracle.v Oracle register machines, LLM completeness 410 

GoalDirected.v Goal reachability preservation 272 

Rice.v Decidability boundary (Law 4) 378 

ExpressiveMinimality.v Four-primitive minimality proofs 391 

Transparency.v Semantic transparency preservation 320 

GovernedCognitiveCompleteness.v Capstone theorem 218 

GovernedMetaprogramming.v Form inspection, splice safety, evolution preservation 520 

Network & Temporal Governance 

NetworkGovernance.v Compositional governance across network boundaries 480 

TemporalPolicyEvolution.v Governed policy changes, rollback safety 550 

Algebraic Semantics McCann [2026a] 

GovernanceAlgebra.v Three-axiom algebra, parametric instantiation 380 

MonoidalCategory.v Symmetric monoidal category, coherence 437 

EffectAlgebra.v Governed algebraic effects, handler algebra 589 

EffectHandlers.v Handler composition under governance 232 

CapabilityComposition.v Capability-indexed composition, trust lattice 645 

TraceSemantics.v Trace extraction, well-governed traces 404 

LedgerConnection.v Trace-to-ledger mapping, tamper evidence 365 

CoterminousBoundary.v Expressibility = governability 359 

Extraction.v Coq-to-OCaml extraction directives 230 

Total 36 modules ≈12,000 

15 8.4 Proof Statistics 

Metric Value Total theorems/lemmas/corollaries 454 Admitted lemmas 0Longest proof (Safety.v: governed interp safe ) 213 lines 

Foundation modules (12 modules, 112 theorems) 

Parameterized coinduction (pcofix) 4 proofs Nested coinduction 1 proof Structural induction 18 proofs Case analysis / inversion 89 proofs 

GCC + Verified Interpreter modules (8 modules, 85 theorems) 

Coinductive bisimulation 3 proofs Direct computation / reduction 12 proofs Case analysis / witness construction 70 proofs 

Algebraic modules (9 modules, 148 theorems) 

Categorical coherence (pentagon, triangle, hexagon) 3 proofs Algebraic composition / lattice properties 52 proofs Capability-indexed dual guarantees 38 proofs Trace / ledger connection 30 proofs Coterminous boundary 6 proofs Extraction directives 19 proofs 

Extension modules (3 modules, 203 theorems) 

Network governance (compositional, narrowing, protocol) 41 proofs Temporal policy evolution (restriction, rollback, continuity) 44 proofs Governed metaprogramming (form governance, materialization) 47 proofs Supporting lemmas and case analysis 71 proofs 

By theorem weight (all 36 modules) 

Core results (coinductive, inductive, categorical) 30 proofs Specification lemmas (capability, trust, hash chain) 30 proofs GCC results (subsumption, oracle, goals, Rice) 50 proofs Extension results (network, temporal, metaprogramming) 132 proofs Algebraic and categorical results 148 proofs Exhaustiveness and case coverage 56 proofs Supporting / scaffolding lemmas 102 proofs The 56 exhaustiveness proofs are individually simple (many reduce to reflexivity or single-step inversion), but collectively they close every case in the DirectiveE and Capability inductive types, ensuring no constructor is unhandled. The 30 core results carry the mathematical content; the remaining proofs provide the scaffolding that makes the core results total. 

8.5 Named Results and Their Coq Identifiers 

16 Result Coq Identifier Module Coinductive Safety Predicate gov safe Safety.v Non-triviality bare io not safe Safety.v Main theorem governed interp safe Safety.v Governance Invariance governance convergence Convergence.v Fixed point fixed point Convergence.v Sufficiency mashin morphism governed Category.v Turing completeness governed turing completeness Completeness.v Simulation correctness simulation correct Completeness.v Behavioral equivalence translation faithful Completeness.v Alternating Normal Form (paper proof) McCann [2026e], Thm 4.4 Necessity (paper proof) McCann [2026e], Thm 6.1 

Verified Interpreter Specification (Section 9) 

System allows all system allows all TrustSpec.v Untrusted blocks HTTP untrusted blocks http TrustSpec.v Capability monotonicity capability allowed monotone * TrustSpec.v Capability exhaustiveness capability mapping exhaustive TrustSpec.v Chain validity chain valid append HashChainSpec.v Tamper detection chain tamper detected HashChainSpec.v Allowed implies gov safe interp directive ok implies gov safe InterpreterSpec.v Denied means no I/O interp directive denied no io InterpreterSpec.v Observability always allowed observability always allowed InterpreterSpec.v 

Governed Cognitive Completeness (Section 11) 

Structural subsumes content structural subsumes content Subsumption.v Content does not subsume content does not subsume structural Subsumption.v Cognitive surjection cognitive surjection CognitiveArchitecture.v Oracle completeness governed oracle completeness Oracle.v Goal reachability goal reachability preservation GoalDirected.v Decidability boundary decidability boundary Rice.v 

Capstone governed cognitive completeness GovernedCognitiveCompleteness.v 

Remark 8.1 (Mechanization scope) . The Alternating Normal Form and Necessity Theorem are paper proofs, not mechanized in Coq. The Normal Form theorem requires reasoning about a term rewriting system (termination measures, critical pairs) that is outside the scope of the interaction tree framework. Necessity Theorem is a computability-theoretic argument (reduction to Rice’s theorem) that does not involve the interaction tree formalization. All governance, invariance, categorical, Turing completeness, and interpreter specification results are fully mechanized. 

8.6 Proof Techniques 

Nested coinduction. The main safety theorem uses nested parameterized coinduction. The outer coinduction ( CIH ) handles the program structure: each directive gets governance wrapping. The inner coinduction ( CIH2 ) handles the I/O tree within each governed directive: the base handler may perform multiple I/O operations, each permitted because governance has already been checked. This nesting is necessary because the I/O tree is coinductive (the handler may produce arbitrarily many I/O events) and embedded inside the outer coinductive program structure. 17 Abstract handler model. The simulation correctness proof in Completeness.v uses Coq’s 

Section mechanism to abstract over a memory handler. Four hypotheses specify correctness (recall returns the stored value, store updates the state, evaluation distributes over bind, evaluation on Ret returns immediately). The proofs are parametric: they hold for any handler satisfying these hypotheses, not just a specific implementation. 

The ret/Ret distinction. In the Interaction Trees library, ret is a typeclass method (from 

Monad itree ) while Ret is the raw constructor of the coinductive type. After simplification, Coq normalizes ret to Ret . The proofs must account for this by unfolding ret and Monad itree before applying rewrite lemmas that match the Ret constructor. 

# 9 Verified Interpreter Specification 

The five named results establish governance safety for an abstract model: any itree DirectiveE R

interpreted through G(h) satisfies gov safe . But a mathematical model, however sound, is only as valuable as its connection to deployed code. This section establishes that connection. 

9.1 Methodology 

We follow the methodology established by seL4 Klein et al. [2009] and Amazon s2n Chudnov et al. [2018]: write a formal specification that is close enough to the implementation to compare mechanically, then test the production code against it. seL4 used a Haskell specification tested against C. Amazon s2n used SAW specifications tested against C. We use Coq specifications tested against a BEAM runtime (implemented in Elixir). The approach produces three complementary assurances: (1) the Coq specification is proved correct with respect to gov safe ; (2) the BEAM runtime agrees with this specification on 70,000+ randomly generated inputs with zero disagreements; and (3) the governance kernel itself is extracted Coq code (Kore NIF), so the component that makes governance decisions runs proved code, not a reimplementation. Together these establish the model-to-implementation correspondence using the same methodology as seL4 and s2n, which is the strongest standard in verified systems software. The formal specification serves as an oracle: any disagreement between spec and runtime is either a bug in the runtime or an error in the formalization. One such bug was found on the 188th random input (Section 9.4). 

9.2 Three Specification Modules 

TrustSpec.v formalizes the trust and capability model from the BEAM runtime’s trust and capability modules. It defines a Capability inductive type with eight constructors mirroring the runtime’s capability atoms, a function capability for directive mapping each of the 14 DirectiveE constructors to its required capability (or None for observability directives), and a 

capability allowed function encoding the trust-level-based permission check. Twenty theorems establish properties including monotonicity (higher trust implies a superset of permissions), exhaus-tiveness (every directive has a capability mapping), and specific security boundaries (untrusted code cannot perform HTTP requests, file system access, database operations, shell execution, or WebSocket connections). 

HashChainSpec.v formalizes the tamper-evident execution trail. Rather than modeling SHA-256 internals, it parameterizes over an abstract hash type with a collision-resistance axiom: distinct inputs 18 produce distinct hashes. A chain valid inductive predicate captures the linked-hash structure. Six theorems establish that correct hashing preserves chain validity, that modifying any event breaks the chain, and that the chain is prefix-closed. 

InterpreterSpec.v is the core contribution. It models the production interpreter as a function on directive lists, matching the actual runtime structure rather than the abstract ITree handler. An InterpreterState record carries trust level, declared capabilities, and the previous hash. The function interp directive implements the governance decision for a single directive: check the capability requirement, verify trust authorization, compute the new hash on success, or return a denial reason on failure. The bridge theorems connect this functional specification to the coinductive safety predicate: 

Theorem 9.1 (Allowed Implies Gov-Safe) . When interp directive allows a directive (returns 

StepOk ), the corresponding G(h) interpretation satisfies gov safe false .

Theorem 9.2 (Denied Means No I/O) . When interp directive denies a directive (returns 

StepDenied ), no I/O event occurs. 

Together, these theorems establish that the functional interpreter specification refines the abstract governance model: if the runtime agrees with the spec, and the spec is proved to satisfy gov safe ,then the runtime satisfies gov safe .

9.3 Property-Based Testing 

A reference interpreter (148 lines) transliterates the Coq specification directly into the runtime language. It is used only in tests, never in production. Property-based tests using StreamData Leop-ardi [2019] generate random directive sequences, trust levels, and capability sets, then compare the reference interpreter’s decisions against the BEAM runtime. Seven properties are tested, each over 10,000 random inputs (70,000+ total): 1. Trust ceiling agreement : spec and runtime agree on allow/deny for every directive and governance context. 2. Capability monotonicity : higher trust levels never reduce permissions. 3. Observability always passes : record step, broadcast, and emit event are never denied at any trust level. 4. Hash chain determinism : identical inputs produce identical hashes in both spec and runtime. 5. Denial propagation : a denied directive halts the sequence. 6. System/stdlib acceptance : system and stdlib trust levels accept all directives. 7. Capability mapping consistency : the spec’s capability mapping covers all directive types. Additionally, 36 conformance tests provide explicit regression coverage, one per Coq theorem. 19 9.4 Bug Discovery 

On the 188th randomly generated test case, the property-based tests found a disagreement. The generated input was an exec command directive at the tested trust level. The specification said 

allowed (because CapComputeExec was in the tested capability set). The BEAM runtime said denied .Investigation revealed a latent bug in the capability taxonomy. The interpreter mapped 

exec command to the capability atom :"compute.exec" . But the capability tree the capabil-ity taxonomy only defined :"compute.code.execute" , not :"compute.exec" . When the runtime expanded capabilities via the tree hierarchy, :"compute.exec" was absent, so the permission check failed. This is exactly the class of bug that unit tests miss: the exec command path worked correctly in isolation (the capability check function was correct), and the capability tree was internally consistent (all defined capabilities expanded properly). The bug existed in the gap between two correct subsystems. Only a specification that modeled both subsystems and their interaction could detect the mismatch. The fix was straightforward: add the exec node to the capability tree under compute , making 

:"compute.exec" a valid capability that the tree expands from :compute . After the fix, all 43 tests pass (7 properties × 10,000+ runs plus 36 conformance tests), with zero disagreements. 

9.5 What This Means 

The Verified Interpreter Specification converts TCB item 3 (faithful runtime implementation) from an unverified assumption to a tested one. The claim is not full verification: we have not extracted Coq code to the runtime language or verified the source line by line. The claim is that the specification is proved correct in Coq, and the runtime agrees with the specification on over 70,000 randomly generated inputs with zero disagreements. This is the same evidentiary standard used by seL4 and s2n for their published verification claims. The bug discovery validates the methodology. A formal specification found a real defect in production code on its first run. The defect was in the boundary between two subsystems, invisible to both unit tests and integration tests. If the specification finds bugs before deployment, it is doing useful work. If it finds them in the first 188 random inputs, it is doing it efficiently. 

9.6 Spec Conformance Summary 

The complete conformance suite comprises 7 properties tested over 10,000+ random inputs each (70,000+ total) and 36 explicit conformance tests, one per Coq theorem across TrustSpec.v, HashChainSpec.v, and InterpreterSpec.v. All 36 conformance tests pass with zero failures. Property-based tests generate random directives, trust levels, and governance contexts; zero disagreements between the specification and the BEAM runtime have been observed across all test campaigns. 1

Governance overhead in the BEAM runtime. The governance pipeline (trust check, capability check, provenance record) runs as part of every directive execution. Governed execution through a supervised BEAM process completes in 0.23 ms median (0.32 ms mean), compared to 0.24 ms median for direct ungoverned execution. The proved governance code runs in production with effectively zero overhead relative to the ungoverned baseline.   

> 1Measured on Apple Silicon (M-series), BEAM/OTP 27, Coq 8.19. n= 50 iterations with 5-iteration warmup for latency measurements.

20 10 Related Work 

Mechanized program verification. CompCert Leroy [2009] mechanized the correctness of a C compiler in Coq. Vellvm Zakowski et al. [2021] used interaction trees to verify LLVM IR semantics. CertiKOS Gu et al. [2016] verified a concurrent OS kernel. These projects demonstrate that mechanized verification scales to real systems. Our work is smaller in scope (a governance pipeline rather than a full compiler or kernel) but addresses a novel domain (AI workflow governance) with novel proof obligations (coinductive safety of infinite governed behaviors). 

Interaction Trees and free monads. Xia et al. Xia et al. [2020] introduced interaction trees as a coinductive representation of recursive and impure programs in Coq. The paco library Hur et al. [2013] provides parameterized coinduction for proving properties of these infinite structures. Interaction trees are structurally related to free monads and their generalizations Kiselyov and Ishii [2015], which also decompose programs into syntax (operations) and semantics (handlers). The key difference is that interaction trees are coinductive, supporting reasoning about infinite behaviors, while free monads are typically inductive. Our safety predicate requires coinduction: programs may run forever, and governance must hold at every step. To our knowledge, this is the first application of interaction trees to AI governance. 

Cognitive architecture completeness. Newell and Simon’s Physical Symbol System Hypothe-sis Newell and Simon [1976] was the first sufficiency claim for intelligence. The Common Model of Cognition Laird et al. [2017] synthesized forty years of convergent results. Our contribution differs: we prove sufficiency via category theory and mechanized proofs rather than empirical coverage. 

Specification-driven testing. The seL4 verified microkernel Klein et al. [2009] used a Haskell specification tested against a C implementation as an intermediate step toward full verification. Amazon’s s2n TLS library Chudnov et al. [2018] used SAW specifications verified against C code with automated reasoning. Both projects demonstrated that a formal specification tested against production code catches real bugs and provides evidence stronger than testing alone but weaker than full extraction-based verification. Our Verified Interpreter Specification follows this methodology, adapted from systems programming (C/Haskell) to AI workflow governance (Coq/BEAM). 

Session types and process calculi. Session types Honda et al. [1998] guarantee that all communication between processes follows a typed protocol. Behavioral types H¨ uttel et al. [2016] generalize this to broader behavioral properties. The governance operator in our architecture plays a similar structural role: all effects must pass through a typed boundary. The distinction is that session types verify protocol compliance between communicating processes, while our predicate verifies governance safety of a single process against an interpretation. Session types are typically checked statically; our safety predicate is proved coinductively over infinite execution. 

Runtime verification. Leucker and Schallhart Leucker and Schallhart [2009] survey runtime verification, where monitors observe program execution and check properties against a formal specification. Our governance operator is structurally a runtime monitor: it intercepts directives and checks permissions. The difference is architectural. Traditional runtime monitors are retrofitted onto existing systems and observe a subset of behavior (coverage is partial by construction). Our governance boundary is the only mechanism through which effects occur; coverage is total by 21 construction. Additionally, runtime verification typically reasons over finite traces, while our safety predicate is coinductive and holds over infinite behaviors. 

Effect systems and capability security. Effect systems Gifford and Lucassen [1986] track computational side effects at the type level. Algebraic effects and handlers Plotkin and Pretnar [2009] decompose effects into operations and interpretations, a structure our governed interpretation mirrors. Koka Leijen [2017] compiles row-typed algebraic effects to efficient code with static effect tracking. Our approach differs in granularity: rather than tracking individual effects at the type level, we enforce a binary distinction (pure computation vs. governed effect) and prove this distinction sufficient for governance safety. Capability security Dennis and Van Horn [1966], Miller [2006] restricts access through unforgeable tokens rather than ambient authority. Our trust and capability model is a capability system, but the novelty is the mechanized proof that the capability check is exhaustive: no directive can bypass it. 

AI safety and behavioral governance. RLHF Ouyang et al. [2022] and Constitutional AI Bai et al. [2022] train language models to refuse harmful outputs. These behavioral approaches operate on model weights and are vulnerable to adversarial inputs Wei et al. [2023]. Guardrail frameworks Rebedea et al. [2023] add output filtering as a separate layer. Our work is orthogonal: we do not govern what a model thinks or says, but govern the transition from intent to effect. The structural approach is compatible with behavioral methods but does not depend on them. 

Category theory for AI. Abbott, Xu, and Maruyama Abbott et al. [2024] proposed a category-theoretic framework for AGI. Fong and Spivak Fong and Spivak [2019] developed applied category theory for compositionality. Our work uses categorical structure as a means to a specific proof (primitive sufficiency), not as a general framework. 

# 11 Governed Cognitive Completeness 

The five foundational results and the verified interpreter specification establish that the architecture is safe, complete, and connected to deployed code. Six additional Coq modules extend these foundations to prove a stronger property: Governed Cognitive Completeness .The capstone theorem ( governed cognitive completeness ) combines six properties into a single result. For any handler h:

P1. Turing complete and governed. Every register machine program, translated and interpreted through G(h), satisfies gov safe . (From Completeness.v .) 

P2. Oracle complete and governed. Every oracle register machine program (with LLM queries), translated and interpreted through G(h), satisfies gov safe . (From Oracle.v .) 

P3. Decidability boundary. Structural properties (capability checks, trust comparisons) are decidable total functions. Semantic properties (halting) are non-trivial. (From Rice.v .) 

P4. Goal reachability preserved. If a program reaches a goal under ungoverned interpretation, the goal value exists under governed interpretation. (From GoalDirected.v .) 

P5. Cognitive architecture complete. Every cognitive capability (Compute, Remember, Reason, Act, Observe) is realized by a Mashin primitive, and each primitive is essential. (From 

CognitiveArchitecture.v .) 22 P6. Subsumption asymmetry. Structural governance subsumes content governance (any handler composed with G is safe), but content governance does not subsume structural governance (direct I/O is unsafe regardless of content filtering). (From Subsumption.v .) The proof assembles results from the six modules; each conjunct applies a single theorem from its respective module. The companion paper McCann [2026b] develops the individual proofs, discusses the decidability boundary in the context of Rice’s theorem, and explores the implications of subsumption asymmetry for AI governance practice. 

# 12 Conclusion 

Five foundational results, six extension modules, one capstone theorem: 454 theorems mechanized in Coq with zero admitted lemmas, two additional results proved on paper with explicit reductions. The Coinductive Safety Predicate captures the semantic content of structural governance: I/O is permitted only under governance authorization, proved coinductively for all programs, forever. The Governance Invariance Theorem shows the governance tower is uniform by construction: no level of meta-recursion escapes, because the type system prevents it. Sufficiency Theorem proves four primitives are enough for any discrete intelligent system, with Turing completeness achieved inside the governed architecture. The Alternating Normal Form provides canonical decomposition for program analysis. Necessity Theorem, via explicit reduction to Rice’s theorem, proves that an architecturally opaque component is not a convenience but a mathematical requirement. These five named results map directly onto four principles, which we call the Laws of Governed Intelligence . Table 1 shows the correspondence: each law is now a machine-checked theorem rather than an assertion. The Alternating Normal Form does not map to a specific law; it provides the canonical decomposition that makes the other proofs tractable.                    

> Law Statement Named Result Key Theorem
> 1. Computation Does Not Effect Pure computation de-clares intent; a governed boundary performs ef-fects Coinductive Safety Pred-icate; Sufficiency Theo-rem
> bare io not safe ,
> governed interp safe
> 2. Governance Is the Boundary Governance is struc-tural and holds at every depth Main Safety Theorem; Governance Invariance Theorem
> governed interp safe ,
> gov tower bisim
> 3. Provenance Is the System Every effect is recorded in atamper-evident chain Verified Interpreter Spec (HashChainSpec)
> chain valid append ,
> chain tamper detected
> 4. The System Can-not Complete Itself Semantic reasoning re-quires an opaque oracle Necessity Theorem Rice’s theorem re-duction

Table 1: Mapping from the Laws of Governed Intelligence to formal results. Laws I–III map to Coq-mechanized theorems. Law IV maps to a paper proof via reduction to Rice’s theorem. Taken together, these results establish a property we call coterminous governance : the boundary of what the system can express and the boundary of what governance covers are the same boundary. Figure 1 illustrates the alternative. When expressiveness and governance are defined independently, their boundaries diverge, creating three regions: ungoverned capabilities (risk), governed capabilities (the only useful region), and governance policies that address non-existent capabilities (theater). Two of three regions are failure modes. Figure 2 shows the coterminous case. The Sufficiency 23 Expressiveness Governance 

UNGOVERNED RISK 

> Side channels Agent bypass Data exfiltration Prompt injection

OVERLAP 

> The only region that works

GOVERNANCE THEATER 

> Policies for capabilities that don’t exist

Two of three regions are failure modes. 

Figure 1: Non-coterminous governance: expressiveness and governance boundaries are misaligned, creating ungoverned risk (left) and governance theater (right). Only the overlap functions correctly. 

What You Can Build 

=

What Governance Covers 

# COTERMINOUS 

> Sufficiency: any intelligent system is expressible Safety: every expressible program is governed Invariance: holds at every depth
> 454 theorems — 0 admitted — 70,000+ tests — 0 disagreements
> No ungoverned region
> No theater region

Figure 2: Coterminous governance in Mashin: expressiveness and governance share the same boundary. The ungoverned region is empty (nothing escapes). The theater region is empty (every policy corresponds to real behavior). Proved in Coq with 454 theorems. Theorem guarantees the expressiveness boundary includes all intelligent systems. The Safety Theorem guarantees the governance boundary includes all expressible programs. The Governance Invariance Theorem guarantees this holds at every depth of meta-recursive composition. There is no ungoverned region because nothing escapes. There is no theater region because every policy corresponds to real behavior. The Verified Interpreter Specification connects these abstract results to deployed code. The specification found a real bug on its 188th random test case. That single data point says more about the value of formal methods than any theorem count. Proofs establish what is mathematically true. Specifications tested against implementations establish what is actually running. Both are necessary. Neither is sufficient alone. The Coq theorems hold for any system that faithfully implements the G operator as specified. That guarantee is real but bounded: it covers the formal model, not the full trusted computing base. The distance between the Coq development and a deployed BEAM runtime includes the OCaml extraction pipeline, the NIF bridge, the Erlang VM, and the operating system. The Verified Interpreter Specification partially addresses this gap by testing agreement between the formal model 24 and a reference interpreter across thousands of random inputs. Narrowing the remaining distance is ongoing work. 

Limitations. The formalization covers effect-level governance: which I/O operations a program may perform and under what policy. It does not address content-level governance (whether an LLM’s output is harmful, biased, or factually incorrect). Content governance requires statistical techniques orthogonal to the structural approach here; our companion paper McCann [2026e] discusses the subsumption relationship between these two levels. The Coq development models governance as a synchronous, sequential decision function. Production systems may require asynchronous governance with latency budgets; extending the formalization to concurrent governance is future work. The Verified Interpreter Specification tests agreement between the Coq model and a reference Elixir interpreter, not the BEAM runtime directly. The gap between reference interpreter and deployed system remains a trusted path, partially addressed by the OCaml extraction pipeline McCann [2026a] but not fully closed. Finally, our expressiveness results assume the four-primitive architecture. Systems with fundamentally different effect structures (e.g., continuous control loops, analog computation) fall outside the current model’s scope. 

# References 

Joshua Abbott, Bin Xu, and Yoshihiro Maruyama. A category-theoretic framework for artificial general intelligence. In International Conference on Artificial General Intelligence (AGI) , 2024. Yuntao Bai, Saurav Kadavath, Sandipan Kundu, Amanda Askell, Jackson Kernion, Andy Jones, Anna Chen, Anna Goldie, Azalia Mirhoseini, Cameron McKinnon, et al. Constitutional AI: Harmlessness from AI feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.08073 , 2022. Andrey Chudnov, Nathan Collins, Byron Cook, Joey Dodds, Brian Huffman, Colm MacC´ arthaigh, Stephen Magill, Eric Mertens, Eric Mullen, Serdar Tasiran, Aaron Tomb, and Eddy Westbrook. Continuous formal verification of Amazon s2n. In International Conference on Computer Aided Verification (CAV) , pages 430–446, 2018. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-96142-2 26. Jack B. Dennis and Earl C. Van Horn. Programming semantics for multiprogrammed computations. 

Communications of the ACM , 9(3):143–155, 1966. doi: 10.1145/365230.365252. Brendan Fong and David I. Spivak. An Invitation to Applied Category Theory: Seven Sketches in Compositionality . Cambridge University Press, 2019. doi: 10.1017/9781108668804. David K. Gifford and John M. Lucassen. Integrating functional and imperative programming. In ACM Conference on LISP and Functional Programming , pages 28–38, 1986. doi: 10.1145/319838.319848. Ronghui Gu, Zhong Shao, Hao Chen, Xiongnan Wu, Jieung Kim, Vilhelm Sj¨ oberg, and David Costanzo. CertiKOS: An extensible architecture for building certified concurrent OS kernels. In 

USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI) , pages 653–669, 2016. Kohei Honda, Vasco T. Vasconcelos, and Makoto Kubo. Language primitives and type discipline for structured communication-based programming. In European Symposium on Programming (ESOP) , pages 122–138, 1998. doi: 10.1007/BFb0053567. 25 Chung-Kil Hur, Georg Neis, Derek Dreyer, and Viktor Vafeiadis. The power of parameterization in coinductive proof. In Proceedings of the ACM on Programming Languages (POPL) , pages 193–206, 2013. doi: 10.1145/2429069.2429093. Hans H¨ uttel, Ivan Lanese, Vasco T. Vasconcelos, Lu´ ıs Caires, Marco Carbone, Pierre-Malo Deni´ elou, Dimitris Mostrous, Luca Padovani, Ant´ onio Ravara, Emilio Tuosto, et al. Foundations of session types and behavioural contracts. ACM Computing Surveys , 49(1):1–36, 2016. doi: 10.1145/2873052. Oleg Kiselyov and Hiromi Ishii. Freer monads, more extensible effects. In ACM SIGPLAN Haskell Symposium , pages 94–105, 2015. doi: 10.1145/2804302.2804319. Gerwin Klein, Kevin Elphinstone, Gernot Heiser, June Andronick, David Cock, Philip Derrin, Dhammika Elkaduwe, Kai Engelhardt, Rafal Kolanski, Michael Norrish, Thomas Sewell, Harvey Tuch, and Simon Winwood. seL4: Formal verification of an OS kernel. In ACM Symposium on Operating Systems Principles (SOSP) , pages 207–220, 2009. doi: 10.1145/1629575.1629596. John E. Laird, Christian Lebiere, and Paul S. Rosenbloom. A standard model of the mind: Toward a common computational framework across artificial intelligence, cognitive science, neuroscience, and robotics. AI Magazine , 38(4):13–26, 2017. Daan Leijen. Type directed compilation of row-typed algebraic effects. Proceedings of the ACM on Programming Languages , 1(POPL):1–28, 2017. doi: 10.1145/3009837.3009872. Andrea Leopardi. StreamData: Data generation and property-based testing for Elixir. https: //github.com/whatyouhide/stream_data , 2019. Hex package. Xavier Leroy. Formal verification of a realistic compiler. Communications of the ACM , 52(7): 107–115, 2009. doi: 10.1145/1538788.1538814. Martin Leucker and Christian Schallhart. A brief account of runtime verification. Journal of Logic and Algebraic Programming , 78(5):293–303, 2009. doi: 10.1016/j.jlap.2008.08.004. Alan L. McCann. Algebraic semantics of governed execution: Monoidal categories, effect algebras, and coterminous boundaries, 2026a. arXiv preprint (to appear). Alan L. McCann. Effect-transparent governance for AI workflow architectures: Semantic preservation, expressive minimality, and decidability boundaries, 2026b. arXiv preprint (to appear). Alan L. McCann. Cryptographic registry provenance: Structural defense against dependency confusion in AI package ecosystems, 2026c. arXiv preprint (to appear). Alan L. McCann. Certified purity for cognitive workflow executors: From static analysis to cryptographic attestation, 2026d. arXiv preprint (to appear). Alan L. McCann. The two boundaries: Why behavioral AI governance fails structurally, 2026e. arXiv preprint (to appear). Mark S. Miller. Robust Composition: Towards a Unified Approach to Access Control and Concurrency Control . PhD thesis, Johns Hopkins University, 2006. Marvin L. Minsky. Computation: Finite and Infinite Machines . Prentice-Hall, 1967. 26 Allen Newell and Herbert A. Simon. Computer science as empirical inquiry: Symbols and search. 

Communications of the ACM , 19(3):113–126, 1976. 1975 ACM Turing Award Lecture. Long Ouyang, Jeff Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll L. Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 35: 27730–27744, 2022. Gordon Plotkin and Matija Pretnar. Handlers of algebraic effects. In European Symposium on Programming (ESOP) , pages 80–94, 2009. doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-00590-9 7. Traian Rebedea, Razvan Dinu, Makesh Narsimhan Sreedhar, Christopher Parisien, and Jonathan Cohen. NeMo guardrails: A toolkit for controllable and safe LLM applications with programmable rails. In Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), System Demonstrations , 2023. Henry Gordon Rice. Classes of recursively enumerable sets and their decision problems. Transactions of the American Mathematical Society , 74(2):358–366, 1953. Alexander Wei, Nika Haghtalab, and Jacob Steinhardt. Jailbroken: How does LLM safety training fail? In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 36, 2023. Li-yao Xia, Yannick Zakowski, Paul He, Chung-Kil Hur, Gregory Malecha, Benjamin C. Pierce, and Steve Zdancewic. Interaction trees: Representing recursive and impure programs in Coq. 

Proceedings of the ACM on Programming Languages , 4(POPL):1–32, 2020. doi: 10.1145/3371119. Yannick Zakowski, Calvin Beck, Irene Yoon, Ilia Zaichuk, Vadim Zaliva, and Steve Zdancewic. Modular, compositional, and executable formal semantics for LLVM IR. Proceedings of the ACM on Programming Languages , 5(ICFP):1–30, 2021. doi: 10.1145/3473572. 27