Title: Polymorphism Meets DHOL

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.00295v1

Published Time: Mon, 04 May 2026 00:20:19 GMT

Number of Pages: 30

Markdown Content:
# Polymorphism Meets DHOL 

Rhea Ranalter 1[0009-0006-2861-548X] , Cezary Kaliszyk 2,1[0000-0002-8273-6059] , and Florian Rabe 3[0000-0003-3040-3655]  

> 1

University of Innsbruck, Computational Logic, Austria 

d.ranalter@gmail.com  

> 2

University of Melbourne, School of Computing, Australia 

ckaliszyk@unimelb.edu.au  

> 3

University of Erlangen-Nuremberg, Computer Science, Germany 

florian.rabe@fau.de 

Abstract. DHOL is an extensional, classical logic that equips the well-known higher-order logic (HOL) with dependent types. This allows for concise encodings of important domains like size-bounded data struc-tures, category theory, or proof theory. Automation support is obtained by translating DHOL to HOL, for which powerful modern automated theorem provers are available. However, a critically missing feature of DHOL is polymorphism. We develop the syntax and semantics of poly-morphic DHOL and extend the translation accordingly. We implement the translation in the logic-embedding tool and evaluate it on a range of TPTP formalizations. The logic-embedding tool, together with an off-the-shelf HOL theorem prover easily creates a PDHOL theorem prover for experimenting. 

# 1 Introduction 

Setting Monomorphic dependently typed higher-order logic (DHOL) was intro-duced in [28,29]. It combines the simplicity of higher-order logic (HOL) [5,11], particularly the use of extensionality and classical Booleans, with the often-wished-for feature of dependent types. Contrary to proof assistants based on dependent type theory [6,19,9], it uses dependent types in the simplest possible setting and, in particular, does not introduce universes or inductive types. In-stead, it only changes HOL’s simple function type A → B into a dependent one 

Πx:AB and allows for base types a to depend on typed arguments. This makes typing undecidable [14] but has the benefit of being close to languages in the HOL ecosystem for which strong automated theorem proving (ATP) support exists. This is leveraged by giving a linear, compositional, and judgment preserving/truth reflecting translation from monomorphic DHOL to monomorphic HOL to obtain implementations of type-checking and theorem proving for DHOL [29], based on partial equivalence relations (PERs) [1]. Prac-tical experiments show that this combination of expressivity and ATP support makes undecidable typing a price worth paying [17].  

> arXiv:2605.00295v1 [cs.LO] 30 Apr 2026 2R. Ranalter et al.

Maybe surprisingly, even though the PER semantics of dependent types has been known for some time [1], it is not widely known and the proofs are complex. Indeed, as noticed during the preparation of [30], the literature contains exam-ples of similar translations that were incorrectly assumed to be sound/complete. Therefore, [29] focused on the simplest possible language and left out a number of common language extensions for HOL. 

Outline and Contribution We introduce PDHOL as an extension of DHOL with shallow (ML-style, rank 1) polymorphism and subtype definitions. This greatly extends the expressivity of DHOL while retaining its simple definition and strong automation support. To simplify the presentation, we split our exposition of PDHOL: Section 2 and 3 present the syntax and proof system for basic polymorphism, and we rele-gate the presentation of two advanced features to Section 6 and 7. In Section 4, we describe the translation from PDHOL to polymorphic HOL (PHOL) and show it is sound and complete. PDHOL has been adopted as a TPTP standard in the form of the new DHF dialect [25]. Using its TPTP representation, we have implemented our translation as a PDHOL →PHOL logic-embedding. This allows using any off-the-shelf PHOL theorem prover as a PDHOL theorem prover with negligible overhead. We apply PDHOL in Section 5 to give elegant formalizations of practi-cally important problems, reaching a level that is typically only found in the rich languages of interactive provers and not in simple logics like PDHOL that provide automated proof support. For example, Section 5 shows how polymor-phism and dependent types allow tracking key invariants in common polymor-phic data structures, e.g., the dimensions and matrices or the black height of red-black trees. In addition to plain type variables (e.g., Πα:type . . . ), PDHOL allows dependent type variables, i.e., type variables that depend on terms (e.g. 

Πα:nat →type . . . ). We spell this out in Section 6 and use it for formalizations that require abstracting over families of types, such as heterogeneous lists. Finally, in HOL, the core feature for building conservative extensions of theories is the subtype definition principle: a fresh type is introduced and axiomatized to be isomorphic to a subtype of an existing type. In Section 7, we extend this feature to the dependently-typed case. We then show how dependent types, polymor-phism, and subtype definitions together allow formalizing complex concepts such as the type of homomorphisms between algebraic structures. 

# 2 Syntax 

The grammar below shows both the DHOL language and our extension to PDHOL. We also mark the parts that must be removed or adjusted to recover HOL as a fragment. Polymorphism Meets DHOL 3

T ::= . | T, a : Π⃗α Π⃗x:⃗ Atype | T, c : Π⃗α A | T, ▷ Π ⃗α Φ Theories 

Γ ::= ◦ | Γ, α : type | Γ, x : A | Γ, ▷ Φ Context 

γ ::= • | γ, A | γ, t | γ, ✓ Substitutions 

A, B ::= a⃗ A⃗ t | α | Πx:AB | o Types 

t, u, Φ ::= c⃗ A | x | λx:At | t u | t ⇒ u | t =A u Terms (including formulas Φ)We use the usual notations for the logical connectives and binders, which are all definable [2], and we write A → B as usual. To avoid case distinctions, we will occasionally merge lists Π⃗α Π⃗x:⃗ A of type and term variables into a single list Π∆ for a context ∆. Similarly, we may merge the list ⃗ A⃗ t of type and term arguments into a single substitution δ. We also use the following abbreviations for sequences of expressions: abbr. expansion remark ⃗A A1 . . . A n types in a substitution, application or binding ⃗t t1 . . . t n terms in a substitution or application ⃗α : type α1 : type . . . α n : type type variables in a context or binding ⃗x :⃗ A x1 : A1 . . . x n : An term variables in a context or binding 

Example 1. We present fixed-length lists, sometimes called vectors, as a running example. For that, we start with natural numbers: 

nat : type 0 : nat suc : nat → nat + : nat → nat → nat 

▷ ∀n : nat .+ 0 n =nat n ▷ ∀n, m : nat .+ ( suc n) m =nat suc (+ n m )

Here, nat is a non-dependent, or simple, base type for which a constant, a constructor, and a function are declared. We will abbreviate suc 0, suc (suc 0) , ... 

with 1, 2, ... .Everything stated so far is expressible in regular HOL — neither dependent types nor polymorphism play a role. We now extend this theory to vectors, keeping the highlighting conventions used in the grammar. 

vec : ΠαΠn:nat type nil : Παvec α 0 cons : ΠαΠn:nat α → vec α n → vec α (suc n)++ : ΠαΠn,m :nat vec α n → vec α m → vec α (+ n m )

Removing the highlighted dependent part yields polymorphic, dynamic lists in PHOL while instantiating the highlighted polymorphic part results in fixed-type vectors in DHOL. Doing both of these gives fixed-type, dynamic lists in HOL. Note that, if one now wants to prove the associativity of ++ , type checking the statement would require a proof of the associativity of + — turning type checking into an undecidable problem in general. 

Contexts and Substitutions Contexts Γ are lists of local declarations, subject to α-renaming and substitution as usual: (i) type variables α : type (ii) typed variables x : A (iii) local assumptions ▷ Φ . ◦ denotes the empty context. Substitutions γ : Γ → Γ ′ provide type/term expressions for all type/term variables declared in Γ in such a way that the assumptions made in Γ are sat-isfied. To track when Γ contained an assumption that must be proved, we write 4 R. Ranalter et al. 

✓ in the corresponding place of a substitution. If we extended the formulation with a language of proofs, the ✓ would be replaced with an appropriate proof expression. • denotes the empty substitution. We write E[γ] for the result of sub-stituting in expression E according to γ, and we abbreviate as E[t] the common case where the substitution is the identity for all variables but the last one. 

Example 2. Assume a typing expression E for a 2-element vector [n, m] , rep-resented formally as cons nat 1 n (cons nat 0 m (nil nat )) : vec nat 2. For this to be properly typed, the context must include typing statements for n

and m. For this example, we also add two assumptions resulting in the context: 

n : nat , m : nat , ▷ n =nat 2, ▷ m =nat 3.A well-formed substitution γ for this context is 2, suc 2, ✓, ✓. E[γ] would then be cons nat 1 2 ( cons nat 0 ( suc 2) ( nil nat )) : vec nat 2. The ✓s in the substitution represent the proof obligations 2 = nat 2 and suc 2 = nat 3 which are trivial after unfolding the abbreviations used for numbers. 

Theories Theories T are lists of global declarations: (i) base types a depending on typed arguments x : A (ii) typed constants c (iii) global assumptions (i.e. axioms) ▷ Φ . . denotes the empty theory. Contrary to contexts, declarations in theories may depend on arguments, and this is the mechanism how both monomorphic DHOL [29] and our exten-sion thereof are defined as generalizations of HOL. The following table gives an overview of the possible combinations: declaration of depending on type symbol term symbol global assumption type variable allowed in PDHOL and PHOL term variable allowed in DHOL definable via Π definable via ∀

local assumption not allowed definable via ⇒

DHOL arises from HOL by allowing type symbols to depend on term arguments. PDHOL arises by allowing all declarations to depend on type arguments. Three combinations are always definable and therefore redundant. We exclude the re-maining two cases: local assumptions as parameters of type/term symbols. These would effectively allow declaring partial functions and partial type symbols. We exclude those because, to our knowledge, they cannot be translated to HOL in a sound and complete way. 

Types and Terms Types A, B, . . . and terms t, u, . . . are formed from 

– references to symbols declared in the theory, which must always be fully instantiated with type and term arguments where applicable 

– references to variables declared in the context 

– the usual production rules of the grammar for dependent function types 

Πx:AB, function formation λx:At and application t u ,

– production rules of the grammar for Booleans o formed from typed equality 

t =A u and dependent implication Φ ⇒ Ψ .Polymorphism Meets DHOL 5

Note that equality of terms is a Boolean term. Equality of types is not—it will be a judgment in the type system. 

Dependent implication means that in F ⇒ G, the well-formedness derivation for G may already assume F is true. This is critical for type-checking, e.g., in 

a =A b ⇒ f a =B[a] f b for a dependent function f . We believe dependent implica-tion is not definable from equality and therefore make it an additional primitive from which corresponding dependent variants of conjunction and disjunction can be defined. While the loss of commutativity of conjunction/disjunction may seem odd at first, the behavior is well-known from short circuit evaluation in some programming languages. 

# 3 Inference System                                                     

> Name Judgment Intuition theories ⊢TThy Tis a well-formed theory contexts ⊢TΓCtx Γis a well-formed context substitutions Γ⊢T∆←δδis a well-formed substitution for ∆
> types Γ⊢TA:type Ais a well-formed type typing Γ⊢Tt:Atis a well-formed term of well-formed type A
> validity Γ⊢TΦBoolean Φis derivable equality of types Γ⊢TA≡Bwell-formed types Aand Bare equal
> Fig. 1. DHOL Judgments

In Fig. 1, we give the judgments of PDHOL. These look the same as for DHOL—but as contexts Γ can now contain type variables, they correspond to polymorphic statements. We use ← in the judgment for well-formed substitutions to avoid confusion with the simple function type constructor →. Fig. 2 and 3 present the rules of PDHOL. They arise as an extension of the rules of DHOL. We use ∈, / ∈ on lists in the obvious manner. The rules in Fig. 2 cover the structural parts, i.e., the declaration of and references to declarations in the theory and context. Note how the rules for theory and context formation are parallel. For example, Rule ThyType and Rule CtxTp handle the declaration of types a : Π⃗α Π⃗x:⃗ Atype in a theory resp. α : type in a context. The main difference is that the former allows type symbols a, term symbols c, and global assumptions to depend on a list ∆ of parameters. To emphasize the common structure of the handling of parameters, we unify all parameter lists notationally into a single context ∆.Each of these six rules for making the declaration is paralleled by one of six rules for referencing (looking up). For example, Rule TpSym and Rule TpVar reference type symbols a resp. type variables α. Because the former is parametric in some context ∆, their references must be instantiated with an appropriate substitution δ for the parameters. 6 R. Ranalter et al. Well-formed theories T

⊢ . Thy T hyBase 

⊢ T Thy a / ∈ T ⊢T ∆ Ctx ∆ =⃗α : type ,⃗ x :⃗ A

⊢ T, a : Π∆type Thy T hyT ype 

⊢ T Thy c / ∈ T ∆ ⊢T A : type ∆ =⃗α : type 

⊢ T, c : Π∆A Thy T hyCon 

⊢ T Thy ∆ ⊢T Φ : o ∆ =⃗α : type 

⊢ T, ▷ Π ∆Φ Thy T hyAss 

Contexts ∆ and substitutions δ for them 

⊢ T Thy 

⊢T ◦ Ctx CtxBase 

⊢T Γ Ctx α / ∈ Γ

⊢T Γ, α : type Ctx CtxT p 

⊢T Γ Ctx 

Γ ⊢T • ← ◦ SubBase 

Γ ⊢T ∆ ← δ α / ∈ ∆ Γ ⊢T A : type 

Γ ⊢T ∆, α : type ← δ, A SubT p 

⊢T Γ Ctx x / ∈ Γ Γ ⊢T A : type 

⊢T Γ, x : A Ctx CtxV ar 

Γ ⊢T ∆ ← δ x / ∈ ∆ Γ ⊢T A : type Γ ⊢T t : A[δ]

Γ ⊢T ∆, x : A ← δ, t SubV ar 

⊢T Γ Ctx Γ ⊢T Φ : o

⊢T Γ, ▷ Φ Ctx CtxAss 

Γ ⊢T ∆ ← δ Γ ⊢T Φ : o Γ ⊢T Φ[δ]

Γ ⊢T ∆, ▷ Φ ← δ, ✓ SubAss 

Lookup of type/term/assumption in a theory (left) or context (right) 

⊢T Γ Ctx a : Π∆type ∈ T Γ ⊢T ∆ ← δΓ ⊢T a δ : type T pSym 

⊢T Γ Ctx α : type ∈ ΓΓ ⊢T α : type T pV ar 

⊢T Γ Ctx c : Π∆A ∈ T Γ ⊢T ∆ ← δΓ ⊢T c δ : A[δ] T ermSym 

⊢T Γ Ctx x : A ∈ ΓΓ ⊢T x : A T ermV ar 

⊢T Γ Ctx ▷ Π ∆Φ ∈ T Γ ⊢T ∆ ← δΓ ⊢T Φ[δ] V alidSym 

⊢T Γ Ctx ▷ Φ ∈ ΓΓ ⊢T Φ V alidV ar 

Fig. 2. DHOL Rules for theories and contexts. 

Finally, the four rules for forming contexts are parallel to the four rules for forming substitutions. For example, Rule SubTp shows how to extend a substitution δ for ∆ to a substitution for ∆, α : type by adding a type substitute 

A for α.The rules in Fig. 3 cover the rules for expressions. We only point out some specialties: The rule Rule TermImpl makes implication Φ ⇒ Ψ dependent by assuming Φ while in the well-formedness of Ψ . The rule Rule TpEqSym, while looking like a routine congruence rule, is the rule that makes type-checking undecidable by making two types equal if their arguments are equal component-wise. Here the equality Γ ⊢T δ ≡∆ δ′ of substitutions holds if the term/type equality judgments hold for all corresponding pairs of terms/types in δ and 

δ′. And because term equality may depend on arbitrary assumptions in theory and contexts, so do all judgments. Finally, Rule TermConv is only needed for constants and variables; for any other term, it can be derived using congruence. Polymorphism Meets DHOL 7Booleans: type formation, terms for equality and implication 

⊢T Γ Ctx 

Γ ⊢T o : type T pBool 

Γ ⊢T t : A Γ ⊢T u : AΓ ⊢T t =A u : o T ermEq 

Γ ⊢T Φ : o Γ, ▷ Φ ⊢T Ψ : oΓ ⊢T Φ ⇒ Ψ : o T ermImpl 

Functions: type formation, λ-abstraction, application 

Γ ⊢T A : type Γ, x : A ⊢T B : type 

Γ ⊢T Πx:AB : type T pP i 

Γ ⊢T A : type Γ, x : A ⊢T t : BΓ ⊢T λx:At : Πx:AB T ermLambda 

Γ ⊢T t : Πx:AB Γ ⊢T u : AΓ ⊢T t u : B[u] T ermApply 

Type equality: congruence for all constructors and conversion of types 

⊢T Γ Ctx α : type ∈ ΓΓ ⊢T α ≡ α T pEqV ar 

⊢T Γ Ctx a : Π∆type ∈ T Γ ⊢T δ ≡∆ δ′

Γ ⊢T a δ ≡ a δ ′ T pEqSym 

⊢T Γ Ctx 

Γ ⊢T o ≡ oT pEqBool 

Γ ⊢T A ≡ A′ Γ, x : A ⊢T B ≡ B′

Γ ⊢T Πx:AB ≡ Πx:A′ B′ T pEqP i 

Γ ⊢T t : A Γ ⊢T A ≡ A′

Γ ⊢T t : A′ T ermConv 

Γ ⊢T t ⊥ Γ ⊢T t ⊤ ⊤, ⊥ defined as usual 

Γ, x : o ⊢T t x BoolExt 

where Γ ⊢T δ ≡∆ δ′ abbreviates the expression-wise provable equality of two substitutions for ∆

We omit the following routine validity rules: congruence rules for application; 

β, η for functions; introduction and elimination for ⇒

Note that propositional and functional extensionality is implied by the rules for equality and the omitted eta rule [29]. 

Fig. 3. DHOL Rules for Types and Terms 

# 4 Translating PDHOL to PHOL 

Overview Like for DHOL the translation applies dependency erasure, written with an overline X, to turn PDHOL syntax into PHOL syntax. Note that because the latter is a fragment of the former, we can reuse all PDHOL notations to write PHOL syntax. Intuitively, term-dependent types are translated into types without their term arguments. The lost information is captured in a partial equivalence relation (PER) in the style of [1]. Readers may consult the examples below or the invariants stated in Thm. 1 to help their intuitions. All term arguments of type symbols are erased; type arguments are kept, i.e., polymorphic symbols remain polymorphic. In particular, we translate the type a⃗ A⃗ t to a⃗ A and the type Πx:AB to A → B. To recover the erased typing information, we define for every PDHOL-type A a PER A∗ on A in PHOL such that the PHOL-formula A∗ t t captures the PDHOL-typing judgment t : A.Critically, term equality s =A t is translated to A∗ s t .8 R. Ranalter et al. 

PERs are symmetric and transitive relations, and an element in a PER is related to itself iff it is related to any element. So A∗ is an equivalence relation on a subtype of A. The corresponding quotient of that subtype of A is the semantics of A under our translation. We write PER( r) to abbreviate that r is a PER (i.e., symmetric and transitive). Expanding the usual definitions of the quantifiers reveals that (up to provable equivalence) A∗ x x acts as a guard when quantifying over x. One might think that a unary predicate (indicating a subtype) would suffice as a type guard instead of a binary predicate. But using quotients of subtypes (and thus PERs) becomes necessary at higher function types where two functions are equal if they map type-guarded inputs to equal outputs. 

Auxiliary Notations While conceptually straightforward, binding the parameters in theories in all generated declarations is notationally complex. Therefore, we abbreviate as follows: 

Definition 1 (Abbreviations for PHOL-Contexts). Given a PHOL-context 

Γ and a PHOL-substitution γ, we abbreviate 

– Γ y is like Γ but contains only the t ype variables. 

– Γ ye is like Γ but contains only the type and t erm variables. (In HOL, as opposed to DHOL, such taking of subcontexts is always legal as long as the order is preserved.) 

– γy is like γ but contains only the t ype substitutes. 

– γye is like γ but contains only the type and t erm substitutes. 

– If Γ consists of only type variables, we write Γ → type for the kind type →

. . . → type → type (taking one type argument for every type variable in Γ ). 

– If Γ consists of type variables ⃗α and term variables ⃗x :⃗ A, we write Γ → B

for Π⃗α A1 → . . . → An → B.

– If Γ consists of type variables ⃗α, term variables ⃗x :⃗ A, and assumptions ▷ Φ i,we write Γ ⇒ Ψ for the PHOL-formula Π⃗α ∀x1 : A1. . . . ∀xm : Am.Φ 1 ⇒

. . . Φ n ⇒ Ψ ; if Γ contains alternating term variables and assumptions, we alternate the ∀ and ⇒ bindings accordingly. 

The abbreviations Γ y and Γ ye remove parameters that a PHOL-declaration cannot bind: term symbol declarations cannot bind assumptions, and type sym-bol declarations cannot bind assumptions or term variables. These occur because every type A yields a translated type A, a binary relation A∗, and a statement 

PER( A∗). Consequently, a type variable α is translated to three declarations: a type variable α, a binary relation α∗ on it, and a local assumption PER( α∗).Similarly, every term t : A yields a translated term t and a statement A∗ t t .Consequently, every term variable x is translated to two declarations: a term variable and a local assumption. Thus, Γ contains a mixture of type variables, term variables, and assumptions even if Γ contains only type variables. The latter must be removed if we want to bind Γ in a PHOL-type or term symbol declaration. Polymorphism Meets DHOL 9

The abbreviations Γ → type , Γ → A, and Γ ⇒ Φ efficiently perform these bindings. For example, if a PDHOL axiom ▷ Π ⃗α Φ is parametric in type variables 

α1, . . . , α n, then Γ contains 3n declarations. Γ ⇒ Φ binds all of them to construct a PHOL-axiom: the type variables in Γ remain type variables, the term variables are ∀-bound, and the unnamed assumptions are bound by ⇒. Any PDHOL usage of this axiom instantiates each type variable α with a type A. In PHOL, this corresponds to instantiating α with A, universal elimination with A∗, and implication elimination with PER( A∗).

Formal Definition We translate types and terms as follows: PDHOL type A Translation A in PHOL PDHOL term t Translation t in PHOL 

a δ a δ y c δ c δ ye 

α α x xo o t =A u A∗ t u Φ ⇒ Ψ Φ ⇒ ΨΠx:AB A → B λx:At λx:Att u t u 

For the translation of type and term symbol references , compare the matching translation of the corresponding declarations in theories below. Contexts (left) and substitutions (right) are translated by concatenating the translations of their components: PDHOL Translation PDHOL Translation 

α : type α : type , α∗ : α → α → o, ▷ PER( α∗) A A, A∗, ✓

x : A x : A, ▷ A ∗ x x t t, ✓

▷ Φ ▷ Φ ✓ ✓

Note how substitutions for ∆ are translated to substitutions for ∆: for example, just like every type variable produces 3 declarations, every type substitute pro-duces 3 corresponding substitutes. In particular, each ✓ in the translation of a substitution represents the invariant that the respective formula is in fact prov-able in the translated context: for example, for every PDHOL-type A, PHOL can prove PER( A∗), and for every PDHOL-term t : A, PHOL can prove A∗ t t .These properties are shown in Thm. 1. The definition of the PER follows the principles of logical relations: PDHOL type A A ∗ t u in PHOL 

a δ a∗ δye t u α α∗ t uo t =o uΠx:AB ∀x, y : A.A ∗ x y ⇒ B∗ (t x ) ( u y )

Here a∗ and α∗ are names introduced during the translation of theories and contexts. These declare the respective PER axiomatically for type symbols and type variables. 10 R. Ranalter et al. 

Example 3. We use the expression E from Ex. 2 to create E2, a list [E, E] of lists by E2 := cons (vec nat 2) 1 E (cons (vec nat 2) 0 E (nil (vec nat 2))) : 

vec (vec nat 2) 2 . Its translation E2 yields cons (vec nat ) 1 E (cons (vec nat ) 0 E (nil (vec nat ))) .Here δ is (vec nat 2) 1 E (... ). Observe that the erasure recurses through the argument list, i.e., (vec nat 2) 1 E (... ). The type argument vec nat 2 is translated into vec nat removing the term argument to the type as well as the generated PER (vec nat 2) ∗ in accordance with our definition of δy . The remaining arguments are terms that do not take term arguments, meaning that the translation does not change them. The type of the expression vec (vec nat 2) 2 is correspondingly erased to 

vec (vec nat ).Finally, the cases for declarations in theories are more complex because they contain contexts. This is where the abbreviations from Def. 1 are used: PDHOL Translation in PHOL 

a : Π∆type where ∆ =⃗α : type ,⃗x :⃗ A a : ∆y → type 

a∗ : ∆ye → a⃗α → a⃗α → o▷ ∆ ⇒ PER( a∗⃗α⃗ α∗⃗x)

c : Π∆A where ∆ =⃗α : type c : ∆ye → A▷ ∆ ⇒ A∗ (c⃗α ) ( c⃗α )

▷ Π ∆Φ where ∆ =⃗α : type ▷ ∆ ⇒ Φ

Example 4. Translating our running example’s theory yields vec : type → type 

for the vector declaration. Note that while ∆ includes type and term variables, the first part of the erasure only considers ∆y , doing away with the term vari-ables, therefore ∆y → type is the kind that takes an equal number of type variables as arguments and returns a type. The second part of the erasure of vector yields vec ∗ : Πα(α → α → o) →

nat → (vec α) → (vec α) → o. ∆ye includes, additionally to the type variables from the previous point, the term variables. This includes the PER generated by the erasure of the type variables as well as the term argument nat .Finally, we get the axiom ▷ Π α∀α∗ : α → α → o. ∀n : nat .P ER (α∗) ⇒

P ER (vec ∗ α α ∗ n). Compared to the last two results of the erasure, we now have additionally the assertion that the type argument comes equipped with a PER. As this is now a validity statement (as opposed to a typing statement) term arguments are now bound by ∀ and ⇒.Readers may note the absence of the according statements for the type nat .In the case of non-dependent base types, the PER collapses to standard equality, resulting in trivial axioms, which we omit. Our translation subsumes that of [29]: If we specialize to DHOL, contexts must not contain type variables and the corresponding cases in the translation of contexts and substitutions and the definition of the PER can be dropped. The arguments ∆ of a type symbol declaration a in a theory contain only type variables, and references a δ take only type arguments, so that (i) ∆y and δy are Polymorphism Meets DHOL 11 

empty (ii) ∆ye contains only the declarations x : A for every type A in ∆ (iii) 

δye contains only the terms t for every term t in δ

Finally, the argument list δ of a term symbol c is empty and thus so is δye .

Properties of the Translation 

Theorem 1 (Preservation of Judgments and Substitution). Every PDHOL judgment in the table below implies the corresponding PHOL judgment about the translated syntax: PDHOL PHOL 

⊢ T Thy ⊢ T Thy 

⊢T Γ Ctx ⊢T Γ Ctx 

Γ ⊢T ∆ ← δ Γ ⊢T ∆ ← δΓ ⊢T A : type Γ ⊢T A : type and 

Γ ⊢T A∗ : A → A → o and Γ ⊢T PER( A∗)

Γ ⊢T t : A Γ ⊢T t : A and Γ ⊢T A∗ t t Γ ⊢T F Γ ⊢T FΓ ⊢T A ≡ B Γ ⊢T A ≡ B and Γ ⊢T A∗ =A→A→o B∗

Moreover, whenever Γ ⊢T ∆ ← δ, we have PDHOL PHOL 

Γ, ∆ ⊢T A : type Γ ⊢T A[δ] ≡ A[δ]

Γ, ∆ ⊢T t : A Γ ⊢T t[δ] = A[δ] t[δ]

The proof of Theorem 1 is straightforward and performed by induction over derivations. An illustrative example is given in Appendix A. 

Theorem 2 (Reflection of Truth). Assume a well-formed PDHOL theory 

⊢ T Thy .If Γ ⊢T F : o and Γ ⊢T F then Γ ⊢T F .In particular, if Γ ⊢T s : A and Γ ⊢T t : A and Γ ⊢T A∗ s t , then Γ ⊢ s =A t.

The assumption about the well-typedness of the statement is necessary: Consider two PDHOL-terms u := λx : A s.x and v := λx : A t.x of some dependent type 

a and different terms s, t . In (P)DHOL an equality u =Πx :A s.A s v between them would be ill-typed. The erased equality however is not only well-typed but provable. The original proof for DHOL [29] is rather involved. Luckily it is easy to ex-tend it to PDHOL. Intuitively, a proof of a PHOL statement F is translated into a proof that exists in the image of the translation. This allows us to subsequently read off a PDHOL proof of the untranslated conjecture F . An overview of the original proof together with the necessary adaptations is given in Appendix B. In the remainder, we will call the combination of these properties well-behavedness 

of the translation. 12 R. Ranalter et al. 

# 5 Implementation and Case Studies 

To evaluate PDHOL and obtain a theorem prover for it, we implemented our translation as part of the logic-embedding tool by Steen [31]. This enables dis-charging PDHOL proof obligations by existing PHOL ATPs. Our tool, as well as the dialect used to formalize this set of problems, has since been adopted as TPTP standard in the form of the new DHF dialect and the DT2H2X prover on SystemOnTPTP [25]. As outlined in Section 4, the translation requires the problem to be well-typed. Therefore, the use of a PHOL ATPs is only sound if we first obtain a type-checker for PDHOL. Because type-checking for PDHOL is undecidable, our tool transforms each conjecture F into n + 1 PHOL conjectures: n type-checking obligations (TCOs) that establish the well-typedness of the problem plus F itself. As an optimization, we replace PERs in our translation with equality when-ever there is no dependence on the term arguments. From an informal comparison with previous data, this seems to yield a speedup of about 5% on the presented problems. We created a set of 53 problems to evaluate and test our implementation on. These include 18 problems that are polymorphic versions of the examples created in [17] for DHOL, and 17 problems that experiment with the impact of instantiating type variables in those conjectures. 11 more problems are lemmas that occur during an inductive proof that the reversal function on red-black trees is an involution (see below). Additionally, there are one formalization each of the zip function as used in functional programming and of finite sets. The remain-ing problems focus on the formalization capabilities of PDHOL as presented in Section 7, in the form of the group problem. This is not yet supported by the implementation. Three PHOL ATP systems were combined with our translator to create PDHOL provers: Vampire v4.7 [26] in portfolio mode, Leo-III v1.6 [32] and Zipperposition v2.1 [7] in higher-order and portfolio mode. The reported times do not include problem translation time, which amounted to 198 ±33ms. All ex-periments ran on an Intel Core i5-6200U CPU at 2.30GHz and 8 GB of RAM. All files and binaries, including the group example from Section 7, can be found in the supplementary material. 4

In the following, we give an overview of those problems. The names of the TPTP files as can be found in the supplements are given in parentheses, with asterisks acting as wildcards. 

Fixed-Length Lists We did a deep formalization of lists following the examples in Section 2 and 4. We also formalized finite types fin : nat → type , and used an accessor elemAt : ΠαΠn:nat vec α n → fin n → α for safe access to list elements. The conjectures we investigated expressed properties of the append function — associativity ( list-app-assoc* ) and the identity of nil ( list-app-nil* ) — as   

> 4https://zenodo.org/records/19931555 Polymorphism Meets DHOL 13

well as the involution property of the reverse function ( list-rev-nil* ). These problems generated more complex TCOs than the red-black trees, due to the arithmetic needed to show that lengths of lists line up after appending. From this, matrices can then be represented by nesting vectors. We formalize, e.g., matrix transposition as transpose : ΠαΠm,n :nat vec (vec α m ) n → vec (vec α n ) m,and formalize commutativity of matrix addition ( inst-poly-matrix-add-com )and element-wise multiplication ( inst-poly-matrix-mul-com ). This leverages both dependent types and polymorphism to concisely repre-sent complex data structures in a way that guarantees their dimensional invari-ants. Another formalization leveraging the list basis, is our formalization of the zip function. Note that Haskell’s default List package 5 includes distinct functions 

zipN for N ∈ { 3, . . . , 7} arguments due to the lack of dependent types. Our formalization ( zip ) acts like an arbitrary dimensional zip function. Adding a formalization of the finite set ( finite-type ) allows to have a un-failing getter function. This example is set up in a way that type-checks, but where the types do not make sense: They would allow getting an element of the empty list. Indeed, as can be seen in the results in Appendix D, Leo-III returns the SZS Status “Contradictory Axioms”. 

Red-Black Trees Red-black trees are binary search trees for which self-balancing is achieved by coloring nodes red or black. Leaves are always black. In addition, two constraints are maintained: The child of a red node must not be red and Every path from a node to its leaves has the same number of black nodes . Such invariants are difficult to capture by non-dependent inductive types. However, in PDHOL, we can use a declaration rbtree : ΠαΠb:oΠn:nat type where rbtree A b n is the type of red-black trees holding values of type A containing n black nodes. This allows capturing the invariant directly in the type. The formalized conjecture states that reversing is an involution. The standard proof of this fact involves inductive definitions that are difficult for ATP systems to deal with. In line with previous work in DHOL [17,24] we split the problem into smaller sub-problems, ensuring well-typedness. The problem is split into a base case for red ( rbt-rev-invol-base-RTLeaf ,the prefix rbt-rev-invol will be omitted from here on) and black ( -base-BTLeaf )leaves. Additionally, there is a problem file asserting that, if a property holds for red leaves and black leaves, it holds for all red-black trees of black-height 1 ( -base-lemma ). This lemma is used to prove the base case for any tree of black-height 1 ( -base ). Next are the step cases: Again there is a step case for red ( -RTStep ) and for black ( -BTStep ) leaves. While the red step case is easy, the black is challenging due to the raised complexity of black nodes. While possible to prove problem 

rbt-rev-invol-BTStep directly, we found three sub-steps ( -subBTStep[1-3] )and added them as axioms to help the ATP system along ( -composedBTStep ).   

> 5hackage.haskell.org/package/base-4.21.0.0/docs/Data-List.html 14 R. Ranalter et al.

While the instanced induction scheme ( -indinst ) timed out, type check-ing was successful. Assuming the instanced induction allows to proof the main conjecture ( rbt-rev-invol ) in just 14s. Finally, we specified one problem not related to the reversal function ( bad_tree ). It serves as a sanity check for the formulation of red-black trees: a conjecture trying to create an ill-formed red-black tree. It postulates that for every red tree, there are two children of arbitrary color. This violates the invariant that a red node must not have red children. Indeed, neither the conjecture itself nor the generated TCOs can be proven. Notably, the red-black tree examples generate very few TCOs (4 in total) compared to the list examples, where the majority of examples generated 1+ TCOs. This is because most constraints, thanks to the efficient formulation pro-vided by the dependent types, reduce to reflexivity. 

Results and Discussion The results of our experiments can be found in Ap-pendix D. A significant number of statements can be proven. This is notably without any fine-tuning of the provers to the specific challenges translated PDHOL problems pose. This illustrates the viability of the translate-and-proof method and, in particular, shows that PDHOL retains automation support while pro-viding a rich addition to expressivity. Notably, the results support that undecidable type-checking is a price worth paying — no TCOs were left unproven. Frequently the TCOs were trivial and required no call to the ATP systems. While this will not be the case for every problem, it is promising to see that for these common data-structures type-checking is efficient. However, for many advanced conjectures, e.g., showing that transposing ma-trices is an involution, the proofs timed out. We believe this is because the nec-essary induction arguments are too difficult for current ATPs (independent of how the data structures are formalized). This is in line with the results reported by Niederhauser et al. [17], indicating that performance improvements can be obtained by building DHOL-specific and/or induction-aware provers, or splitting problems in a way that helps the ATP system with the induction arguments. 

# 6 Dependent Type Variables 

For simplicity, we have so far not described the feature of type variables de-pending on term variables as in α : type , β : α → type . The following table shows the possible dependencies for variables in contexts akin to how we did it in Section 2 for theories :declaration of depending on type variable term variable local assumption type variable not allowed to avoid size issues term variable this section definable via Π definable via ∀

local assumption not allowed definable via ⇒Polymorphism Meets DHOL 15 

Contrary to global declarations in theories, variable declarations must not bind type variables. This ensures that contexts are small and we can formulate the semantics without requiring a hierarchy of universes or similar. After adding the final feature of dependent type variables, the grammar of PDHOL becomes: 

T ::= . | T, a : ΠΓ type | T, c : ΠΓ A | T, ▷ Π Γ FK ::= type | Πx:AK k ::= A | λx:AkΓ ::= ◦ | Γ, α : K | Γ, x : A | Γ, ▷ F γ ::= • | γ, k | γ, t | γ, ✓

A, B ::= a γ | α t . . . t | Πx:AB | o t, u ::= c γ | x | λx:At | t u | t ⇒ u | t =A u

Here k produces types with uninstantiated term dependencies, and K produces their kinds. The grammar used so far arises as the special case K = type and 

k = A. Their typing is given by the rules 

Γ, ∆ ⊢T B : type 

Γ ⊢T λ∆B : Π∆type 

α : Π∆type ∈ Γ Γ ⊢T ∆ ← δΓ ⊢T α δ : type where ∆ =⃗x :⃗ A

Adjusting Rule CtxTp and Rule SubTp accordingly is straightforward. The grammar above describes the arguments of global declarations as a single context (as in ΠΓ ) rather than a list of type variables followed by a list of term variables (as in Π⃗α Π⃗x:⃗ A). This is necessary because term variables x : A may now occur in a type variable declaration α : A → type . Therefore, we can no longer assume that all type variables are bound before all term variables. The typing rules for theories remain unchanged except that we to modify the syntactic restrictions on the context in Rule ThyType, Rule ThyCon, and Rule ThyAss. For the same reason as for global declarations in theories, we do not allow local assumptions in Γ .

Example 5. We give heterogeneous lists as a variant of vectors where each com-ponent may have a different type. Consequently, all operations must take a dependent type variable α : fin n → type that provides the types of the n

components. This uses finite types fin n = {0, . . . , n − 1}, which we can declare by 

fin : nat → type fnext : Πn:nat fin n → fin (suc n) ftop : Πn:nat fin (suc n)

Then heterogeneous lists can be declared as 

Hlist : Πn:nat (fin n → type ) → type hlist : Πn:nat ΠL:fin n→type (fin n → L n ) → Hlist n L 

hget : Πn:nat ΠL:fin n→type Hlist n L → Πi:fin nL i 

Note how type and term variables alternate, e.g., in the declaration of hlist .The translation rules for declarations in a theory remain unchanged except for generalizing the syntactic restrictions on the contexts and substitutions. We only need to adjust the three cases below for the translation of type variables. The invariants are the same. 16 R. Ranalter et al. 

PDHOL PHOL type variable declaration α : Π∆type where ∆ =⃗x :⃗ A α : type 

α∗ : ∆ye → α → α → o,

▷ ∆ ⇒ PER( α∗⃗x)

type variable substitute λ∆A where ∆ =⃗x :⃗ A A, λ ∆ye A∗, ✓

type variable reference α δ α

# 7 Subtype Definitions 

Large HOL theories are usually built by chaining conservative extension princi-ples. Besides direct definitions, the most important such principle used in HOL-based ITPs is definitional subtypes [12]. For example, the theory-level declara-tion a := A|p for some predicate p : A → o conservatively extends the contain-ing theory with declarations for a fresh (undefined) type a and fresh functions 

Abs : A → a and Rep : a → A that are axiomatized to be bijections be-tween a and the set of elements of A that satisfy p. This extension principle is expressive enough to define, e.g., record and inductive types. But it becomes particularly powerful in the presence of polymorphism, where it can introduce new type operators a. For example, simple product types can be defined using 

a α β := ( α → β → o)|p where p is the property that f is true for exactly one argument pair. Generalizing this extension principle to dependent types further increases its expressivity and enables PDHOL to make complex type definitions. We extend our language as follows: 

T ::= T, a := λ∆A|p for some ∆ =⃗α : type ,⃗x :⃗ A

with a typing rule requiring ∆ ⊢T p : A → o and a proof obligation that we discuss below. Abbreviating δ := ⃗α⃗ x, its semantics is defined by elaboration into 

a : Π∆type Abs : Π∆A → a δ Rep : Π∆a δ → A▷ Π ⃗α ∀⃗x :⃗ A.  ∀u : a δ. p (Rep δ u ) ∧ Abs δ (Rep δ u ) = a δ u

∧  ∀v : A. p v ⇒ Rep δ (Abs δ v ) = A v.

In the same way as for HOL subtype definitions, in the second part of the axiom, the predicate p occurs crucially to require Rep δ (Abs δ v ) = A v only for those v

that are in the intended subtype, capturing that we think of Abs as a partial function. Because all functions are total, Abs δ v is also well-typed if ¬(p v ) but remains unspecified. That is conservative if the new type a is non-empty, which is why HOL additionally requires the proof obligation ∃v : A.p v . While this is natural for HOL (where all types are assumed to be non-empty anyway), this is not ideal for DHOL, where empty types are useful and allowed. Nonetheless, we adopt the same proof obligation here for simplicity, i.e., a subtype definition is well-typed only if ∆ ⊢T ∃v : A.p v . Our translation is in fact judgment preserving and truth reflecting for weaker conditions, but we leave the details to future work. Polymorphism Meets DHOL 17 

We extend our translation as follows: every subtype definition a := λ∆A|p is translated to the corresponding PHOL subtype definition a := λ⃗α A|(λu:AA∗ u u ∧

p u ). This translation commutes with elaboration: we obtain isomorphic PHOL theories if we (i) elaborate a PDHOL subtype definition and then translate it , or (ii) translate it to a PHOL definition and then apply the usual PHOL elabo-ration. Consequently, the translation remains well-behaved. 

Example 6 (Algebraic Structures). Let us assume we have already formalized types for algebraic structures, such as a type group : Παtype with (among others) a selector op : Παα → α → α. (In principle, the type group α could itself be defined as a subtype of α → α → α. But that would require a more complex analysis of conservativity because there is no group on the empty type.) We can now use polymorphism to abstract over the carrier set and then use dependent types to formalize various constructions from universal algebra. For example, we can define the predicate ishom : Πα,β group α → group β → (α →

β) → o , and use that to define the polymorphic and dependent type of group homomorphisms hom by 

ishom α β G H m =o ∀x, y : α.m (op G x y ) = β op H (m x ) ( m y )

hom := λα : type , β : type , G :group α, H :group β (α → β)|ishom α β G H 

Similar examples are the types of subgroups of a group, conjugacy classes of a group, or actions of a group on a set, and accordingly for all other algebraic theories. As an example theorem, we state that homomorphisms preserve the neutral element: 

Πα,β ∀G : group α, H : group β, m : hom α β G H. ∀e : α. neut α G e ⇒ neut β H (Rep hom m e )

This example illustrates the expressiveness of the PDHOL language while assuag-ing lingering doubts about undecidable type checking: Although its a complex formulation we cannot proof directly, similar to examples in Section 5, the TCOs are discharged easily. 

# 8 Conclusion and Related Work 

Summary We extended dependently typed higher-order logic with polymorphism and subtype definitions. A translation to polymorphic HOL yields an efficient automated reasoning procedure for the calculus. We demonstrated the practical usability of the language and its automation by encoding and automatically proving several practical problems that combine polymorphism with dependent types and cannot be represented as concisely in either polymorphic HOL or monomorphic DHOL. 18 R. Ranalter et al. 

Related Work While there are some practical examples that make deep polymor-phism desirable, they tend to interact poorly with ATP systems. Indeed, most logics that support deep polymorphism introduce a hierarchy of universes as in Martin-Löf type theory [16], which goes far beyond the expressivity of current ATP tools. On the other hand, shallow polymorphism still allows standard set-theoretic semantics without any size issues. That makes it the variant of choice in HOL theorem provers — both interactive [11,18,13] and automated [33,26,34]. Indeed, our definition has the key advantage that DHOL polymorphism can be directly translated to HOL polymorphism, ensuring that proof obligations re-main efficiently solvable for the ATP system. PVS [20] provides a combination of dependent types and shallow polymor-phism similar to PDHOL. It combines native decision procedures with interac-tion and automation but it is too expressive for easy translation into standard ATP tools. [22] gives a model-theoretical semantics of DHOL that includes poly-morphism. Recently the Vampire automated theorem prover has been extended with shallow polymorphism [4]. The extension is very elegant, but it focuses on non-dependent types so far. CoqHammer [8] tackles a similar problem but sits on a different end of the expressivity and automation spectrum: It translates Rocq into first-order logic. It is, however, incomplete. The general idea of translating dependent type theories is not new: [10] exper-imented with a translation of LF into hereditary Harrop formulas, a simply-typed meta-logic. Similarly, Jacobs and Melham [15] give a translation of dependent type theory into higher-order logic. Both translate dependent types to unary predicates that serve as type guards. Such translations are not necessarily sound and complete. This is because refinement types are not closed under function type formation, i.e., the function type on refinement types cannot be represented as a refinement of a function type. A similar argument applies to quotients. This motivated the use of PERs, which subsume refinements and quotients, and are closed under function type formation. Thus, many constructions that involve refinements or quotients of base types are eventually generalized to PERs in order to complete inductive definitions or proofs. Because dependent base types can be understood as re-finements of a bigger type, the semantics of dependent types is one such con-struction. PERs have been used to formulate the semantics of dependent types, in essentially the same way as we do, going back to at least [1] and were used for the semantics of NuPRL [23]. Another example are parametricity arguments in polymorphic type theories such as [3]. For example, recently, [21] presented a parametricity translation from HOL to itself that interprets every type as a PER. That translation arises as the special case of ours where the input is restricted to the HOL fragment of DHOL. Because, their source and target language are the same, they additionally study which HOL-style subtype definitions can be translated to themselves, leading them to introduce the notion of wideness. 

Future Work Even though our automation is well-behaved, it is still not as strong as desirable. To improve this, we plan to define dedicated automated reasoning Polymorphism Meets DHOL 19 

rules for PDHOL similar to Niederhauser et al. [17] for DHOL. Furthermore, a larger case study involving dependently typed examples from ITPs would allow checking if PDHOL constitutes a useful intermediate language for proof automa-tion. Finally, we want to combine our work with the extension of DHOL with subtyping from [27]. While we expect simply merging the language extensions to be straightforward, their union allows adding bounded polymorphism where type variables α < : A can only be instantiated with subtypes of A. Intuitively, the type system and translation can be extended easily to allow such upper bounds on type variables, but it is unclear how difficult the judgment preservation and truth reflection proofs and the design of a (sub)type-checking algorithm will be in that case. 

# References 

1. S. Allen. A Non-Type-Theoretic Semantics for Type-Theoretic Language . PhD thesis, Cornell University, 1987. 2. P. Andrews. An Introduction to Mathematical Logic and Type Theory: To Truth Through Proof . Academic Press, 1986. 3. Jean-Philippe Bernardy, Patrik Jansson, and Ross Paterson. Parametricity and dependent types. In Paul Hudak and Stephanie Weirich, editors, Proceeding of the 15th ACM SIGPLAN international conference on Functional programming, ICFP 2010, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, September 27-29, 2010 , pages 345–356. ACM, 2010. doi:10.1145/1863543.1863592 .4. A. Bhayat and G. Reger. A polymorphic vampire - (short paper). In Nicolas Peltier and Viorica Sofronie-Stokkermans, editors, Automated Reasoning - 10th International Joint Conference, IJCAR 2020, Paris, France, July 1-4, 2020, Pro-ceedings, Part II , volume 12167 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pages 361– 368. Springer, 2020. doi:10.1007/978-3-030-51054-1\_21 .5. A. Church. A Formulation of the Simple Theory of Types. Journal of Symbolic Logic , 5(1):56–68, 1940. doi:10.2307/2266170 .6. Coq Development Team. The Coq Proof Assistant: Reference Manual. Technical report, INRIA, 2015. 7. Simon Cruanes. Extending Superposition with Integer Arithmetic, Structural In-duction, and Beyond. (Extensions de la Superposition pour l’Arithmétique Linéaire Entière, l’Induction Structurelle, et bien plus encore) . PhD thesis, École Poly-technique, Palaiseau, France, 2015. URL: https://tel.archives-ouvertes.fr/ tel-01223502 .8. Lukasz Czajka and Cezary Kaliszyk. Hammer for coq: Automation for dependent type theory. J. Autom. Reason. , 61(1-4):423–453, 2018. URL: https://doi.org/ 10.1007/s10817-018-9458-4 , doi:10.1007/S10817-018-9458-4 .9. L. de Moura, S. Kong, J. Avigad, F. van Doorn, and J. von Raumer. The Lean Theorem Prover (System Description). In A. Felty and A. Middeldorp, editors, 

Automated Deduction , pages 378–388. Springer, 2015. 10. Amy P. Felty and Dale Miller. Encoding a dependent-type lambda-calculus in a logic programming language. In Mark E. Stickel, editor, 10th International Con-ference on Automated Deduction, Kaiserslautern, FRG, July 24-27, 1990, Proceed-ings , volume 449 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pages 221–235. Springer, 1990. doi:10.1007/3-540-52885-7\_90 .20 R. Ranalter et al. 11. M. Gordon. HOL: A Proof Generating System for Higher-Order Logic. In G. Birtwistle and P. Subrahmanyam, editors, VLSI Specification, Verification and Synthesis , pages 73–128. Kluwer-Academic Publishers, 1988. 12. M. Gordon and A. Pitts. The HOL Logic. In M. Gordon and T. Melham, editors, 

Introduction to HOL, Part III , pages 191–232. Cambridge University Press, 1993. 13. J. Harrison. HOL Light: A Tutorial Introduction. In Proceedings of the First International Conference on Formal Methods in Computer-Aided Design , pages 265–269. Springer, 1996. 14. M. Hofmann. Extensional Constructs in Intensional Type Theory . CPHC/BCS distinguished dissertations. Springer, 1997. 15. B. Jacobs and T. Melham. Translating dependent type theory into higher order logic. In M. Bezem and J. Groote, editors, Typed Lambda Calculi and Applications ,pages 209–29, 1993. 16. P. Martin-Löf. An Intuitionistic Theory of Types: Predicative Part. In Proceedings of the ’73 Logic Colloquium , pages 73–118. North-Holland, 1974. 17. J. Niederhauser, C. E. Brown, and C. Kaliszyk. Tableaux for automated reasoning in dependently-typed higher-order logic. In Christoph Benzmüller, Marijn J. H. Heule, and Renate A. Schmidt, editors, Automated Reasoning - 12th International Joint Conference, IJCAR 2024, Nancy, France, July 3-6, 2024, Proceedings, Part I, volume 14739 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pages 86–104. Springer, 2024. doi:10.1007/978-3-031-63498-7\_6 .18. T. Nipkow, L. Paulson, and M. Wenzel. Isabelle/HOL — A Proof Assistant for Higher-Order Logic . Springer, 2002. 19. U. Norell. The Agda WiKi, 2005. http://wiki.portal.chalmers.se/agda .20. S. Owre, J. Rushby, and N. Shankar. PVS: A Prototype Verification System. In D. Kapur, editor, 11th International Conference on Automated Deduction (CADE) ,pages 748–752. Springer, 1992. 21. Andrei Popescu and Dmitriy Traytel. Admissible types-to-pers relativization in higher-order logic. In A. Ahmed, R. Findler, D. Garg, and F. Pottier, editors, 

Principles of Programming Languages , pages 1214–1245. ACM, 2023. 22. F. Rabe. Semantics for Dependently-Typed HOL. In A. Biere, C. Lutz, and S. Negri, editors, Automated Reasoning . Springer, 2026. to appear. 23. Vincent Rahli, Mark Bickford, and Abhishek Anand. Formal program optimization in Nuprl using computational equivalence and partial types. In Sandrine Blazy, Christine Paulin-Mohring, and David Pichardie, editors, Interactive Theorem Prov-ing - 4th International Conference, ITP 2013, Rennes, France, July 22-26, 2013. Proceedings , volume 7998 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pages 261–278. Springer, 2013. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-39634-2\_20 .24. D. Ranalter, C. E. Brown, and C. Kaliszyk. Experiments with choice in dependently-typed higher-order logic. In Nikolaj S. Bjørner, Marijn Heule, and Andrei Voronkov, editors, LPAR 2024: Proceedings of 25th Conference on Logic for Programming, Artificial Intelligence and Reasoning, Port Louis, Mauritius, May 26-31, 2024 , volume 100 of EPiC Series in Computing , pages 311–320. EasyChair, 2024. URL: https://doi.org/10.29007/2v8h , doi:10.29007/2V8H .25. Daniel Ranalter, Cezary Kaliszyk, Florian Rabe, and Geoff Sutcliffe. The de-pendently typed higher-order form for the TPTP world. In René Thiemann and Christoph Weidenbach, editors, Frontiers of Combining Systems - 15th Interna-tional Symposium, FroCoS 2025, Reykjavik, Iceland, September 29 - October 1, 2025, Proceedings , volume 15979 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pages 287–305. Springer, 2025. doi:10.1007/978-3-032-04167-8\_16 .Polymorphism Meets DHOL 21 26. A. Riazanov and A. Voronkov. The design and implementation of Vampire. AI Communications , 15:91–110, 2002. 27. C. Rothgang and F. Rabe. Subtyping in dependently-typed higher-order logic. In R. Thiemann and C. Weidenbach, editors, Frontiers of Combining Systems -15th International Symposium, FroCoS 2025, Reykjavik, Iceland, September 29 -October 1, 2025, Proceedings , volume 15979 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science ,pages 98–114. Springer, 2025. doi:10.1007/978-3-032-04167-8\_6 .28. C. Rothgang, F. Rabe, and C. Benzmüller. Theorem Proving in Dependently Typed Higher-Order Logic. In B. Pientka and C. Tinelli, editors, Automated De-dution , pages 438–455. Springer, 2023. 29. C. Rothgang, F. Rabe, and C. Benzmüller. Dependently-Typed Higher-Order Logic. ACM Transactions on Computational Logic , 27(1), 2025. 30. M. Southern. A Framework for Reasoning about LF Specifications . PhD thesis, University of Minnesota, 2021. 31. A. Steen. An extensible logic embedding tool for lightweight non-classical reasoning (short paper). In B. Konev, C. Schon, and A. Steen, editors, Practical Aspects of Automated Reasoning , volume 3201 of CEUR Workshop Proceedings . CEUR-WS.org, 2022. 32. A. Steen and C. Benzmüller. The higher-order prover Leo-III. In G. De Giacomo, A. Catalá, B. Dilkina, M. Milano, S. Barro, A. Bugarín, and J. Lang, editors, 

European Conference on Artificial Intelligence , pages 2937–2938. IOS Press, 2020. 33. A. Steen, M. Wisniewski, and C. Benzmüller. Going polymorphic - th1 reasoning for leo-iii. In Thomas Eiter, David Sands, Geoff Sutcliffe, and Andrei Voronkov, editors, IWIL Workshop and LPAR Short Presentations , volume 1 of Kalpa Pub-lications in Computing , pages 100–112. EasyChair, 2017. doi:10.29007/jgkw .34. P. Vukmirovic, A. Bentkamp, J. Blanchette, S. Cruanes, V. Nummelin, and S. Tour-ret. Making higher-order superposition work. J. Autom. Reason. , 66(4):541– 564, 2022. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10817-021-09613-z , doi:10.1007/ S10817-021-09613-Z .

# A Preservation 

Proof. Thoerem 1 is proved by straightforward induction on derivations. The sub-proofs for the individual proof rules follow the same structure. We therefore present here only one example (the Rule TpSym rule) — applying the induction 22 R. Ranalter et al. 

hypothesis followed by definitions of the erasure in full detail: 

⊢T Γ Ctx assumption (1) 

a : Π∆type ∈ T assumption (2) 

a : ∆y → type ∈ T -def of DHOL Theories on 2 (3) 

a∗ : ∆ye → a⃗α → a⃗α → o ∈ T -def of DHOL Theories on 2 (4) 

▷ ∆ ⇒ P ER (a∗⃗α⃗α ∗⃗x) ∈ T -def of DHOL Theories on 2 (5) 

Γ ⊢T ∆ ← δ assumption + IH (6) 

Γ ⊢T ∆y ← δy see Note in Def. 1 (7) 

Γ ⊢T ∆ye ← δye see Note in Def. 1 (8) 

Γ ⊢T a δ y : type Rule TpSym , 1, 3, 7 (9) 

Γ ⊢T a δ : type -def of DHOL Types on 9 (10) 

Γ ⊢T a∗ δye : ( a⃗α → a⃗α → o)[ δye ] Rule TermSym , 1, 4, 8 (11) 

Γ ⊢T a∗ δye : a δ y → a δ y → o apply substitution , 11 (12) 

Γ ⊢T (a δ )∗ : a δ → a δ → o ∗-def and -def of DHOL types 12 (13) 

Γ ⊢T P ER (a∗⃗α⃗α ∗⃗x)[ δ] Rule ValidSym , 1, 5, 6 (14) 

Γ ⊢T P ER (a∗ δye ) apply substitution , 14 (15) 

Γ ⊢T P ER (( a δ )∗) ∗-def , 15 (16) A remark about steps 7 and 8: Inspection of the inference rules for substitutions shows, that the remark in Def. 1 extends to substitutions by just traversing the list and throwing out the corresponding elements of δ.The same proof structure is directly applicable to the other rules, only note that Rule TpSym, Rule TermSym and Rule ValidSym all proceed by substituting the ∆ in the premises by the δ of the substitution. 

# B Reflection 

The truth-reflection proof for PDHOL follows the one given for monomorphic DHOL by Rothgang et al. [29] closely, as the introduction of shallow polymor-phism requires only minor changes. This similarity stems from the fact that most changes to the proof rules happen to accommodate the declarations in theory and context, while the validity rules stay the same. Our extension merely affects which types are possible and provides the option for polymorphic conjectures. As reasoning can only happen on fully applied base types, there are only minor changes to the formulation of some of the intermediate results. In the sequel we will start with a overview over the proof idea, followed by the necessary definitions and finally the extensions to the original proof necessitated by our extending of the theory. Polymorphism Meets DHOL 23 

The main challenge lies in the fact that there are situations in which the erasure of ill-typed DHOL terms results in terms that are well-typed in HOL. This is due to the non-injectivity of the translation: two fixed length lists a : lst 2

and b : lst 3 of length 2 and 3 respectively are incomparable in DHOL, but erasing them results in a : lst and b : lst for which equality would be well-typed. Note that the opposite problem, namely that a well-typed DHOL term t

translates to an ill-typed HOL term t, cannot happen. This is clear due to the definition of the translation. As a result of this non-injectivity, a valid HOL-derivation cannot be trans-lated into a valid DHOL-derivation without further processing. The proof idea, then, is to show that it is possible to transform a HOL proof of some translated, well-typed DHOL statement, into a HOL proof that is in the well-typed image of the translation, allowing a direct translation back into a DHOL proof. We proceed to show this in the following steps: First, we will show that the translation, while not injective in general, is type-wise injective — meaning that if t : A and s : A are distinct DHOL terms of equal DHOL type, then so are t : A

and s : A. This will allow us to associate a unique DHOL term with HOL terms that come from the erasure, assuming the type is known. Using this, we show that HOL proofs can be transformed into HOL proofs that lie in the well-typed image of the translation which will finally allow us to map said proofs to DHOL proofs of the untranslated conjecture. We front-load this section with the necessary definitions to highlight the relationship between them. 

Definition 2. Ill-typed DHOL terms t with a well-typed counterpart t will be called spurious while terms in which both — erased and original — terms are well-typed will be called proper . A improper term t is not in the (translation-)image of any DHOL term t.

Normalizing an improper term results in a proper or spurious one. We in-troduce the normalizing function used in the proof in Figure 4 and expand on it in the sequel. Normalizing an already proper or spurious term returns the same term. We extend the notion of “proper” from terms to contexts ∆, whenever Γ can be obtained from ∆ by adding typing assumptions. Then Γ is called the quasi-preimage of the proper context ∆.Furthermore, given a proper HOL context ∆, a statement ϕ over this context is called quasi-proper , iff the normalization of ϕ is F for Γ ⊢ F : o and Γ

quasi-preimage of ∆. In this case, F is called a quasi-preimage of ϕ.As a last extension to this terminology, a validity judgment ∆ ⊢ ϕ is also called proper iff ∆ is proper and ϕ is quasi-proper in this context. Then Γ ⊢T F

is called a relativization of ∆ ⊢T ϕ and Γ ⊢T F is called a quasi-preimage of 

∆ ⊢T ϕ.We call an improper term almost proper iff its normalization is not spurious. This is equivalent to saying an improper term is almost proper iff it is quasi-proper (has a well-typed quasi-preimage). Otherwise, it is called unnormalizably spurious .24 R. Ranalter et al. 

Finally, we give a definition of the property which allows us to translate HOL proofs into DHOL proofs. A valid HOL derivation is called admissible iff all terms occurring in it are almost proper. 

B.1 Type-wise injectivity of the translation 

Compared to the original formulation of Rothgang et al. [29] there are some changes to the translation. It is now possible to apply type arguments to base types and constants. These, however, are preserved in the erasure: base types 

a δ and constants c δ result in a δ y and c δ ye respectively. The other relevant change to the system is the addition of type variables 

α : type as an option to the type system. These are straightforwardly translated into α : type , α∗ : α → α → o, ▷ PER( α∗).

Lemma 1. Let s, t be DHOL terms of type A. Assuming s and t are different, then s : A and t : A are different. Proof. The proof proceeds by induction over the term structure. Different top-level productions result in different terms after the translation, so we can limit ourselves to the cases where both terms have the same root symbol. For non-equality terms, the only cases that need to be adjusted from the original proof, are where we performed changes to the translation. For that, notice that erasing applied base types and constants results in re-cursive calls to the translations of the applied types. By the induction hypothesis, these are already different, concluding the proof. Another interesting case occurs when the terms t, s are equalities over two types erased to the same type. This is not possible for type variables α as their translation just yields their simple counterparts. All remaining cases are identical to the original presentation. 

B.2 Transforming HOL proofs into admissible HOL proofs 

In order to transform HOL proofs into admissible HOL proofs, the original proof defines two functions. First, they define a normalization function, given in Fig-ure 4, with changes due to the incorporation of polymorphism highlighted. This normalization turns improper HOL-statements into proper or spurious ones, i.e. the term norm [t] is in the image of the translation after normalization. Second, a normalizing statement transformation sRed (t) is applied to the derivation. A normalizing statement transformation is a function that replaces terms and their context in statements in such a way that unnormalizably spurious terms end up as almost proper ones. In contrast to norm [t] the changes to accommodate polymorphism do not require any changes in the definition of 

sRed (t), so the function (given in Figure 5) is identical to the one in [29]. sRed (t)

proceeds by beta-eta normalizing terms and, in case this does not make them almost proper, replaces unnormalizably spurious function applications of type B

by a “default term” ωB : B which is proper and exists due to the non-emptiness assumption in HOL. Polymorphism Meets DHOL 25 

norm [t] := tnorm [norm [s]] := norm [s]

norm [A∗ s] := λy : A.A ∗ s y norm [A∗] := λx : A.λy : A.A ∗ x y norm [c⃗ A ] := c⃗ A norm [x] := xnorm [f t ] := norm [f ] norm [t]

norm [λx : C.t ] := λx : C.norm [t]

norm [s =A t] := A∗ s t norm [s ⇒ t] := norm [s] ⇒ norm [t]

norm [∀x : A.A ∗ x x ⇒ G] := ∀x, y : A.A ∗ x y ⇒ G

If F not of shape A∗ _ _ ⇒ _ or ∀x′ : A.A ∗ x x ′ ⇒ _ :

norm [∀x : A.F ] := norm [∀x : A.A ∗ x x ⇒ F ]

Fig. 4. Definition of norm [t] with changes highlighted. 

sRed (tA) := tA

if t has quasi-preimage of type A 

sRed (fΠx:AB tA) := sRed (sRed (fΠx:AB ) sRed (tA)) 

if fΠx :A.B tA not beta-eta reducible In the following, the term tA on the left-hand side is assumed to not be almost proper with a quasi-preimage of type A :

sRed (tA) := sRed (tβη A )

if t eta-beta reducible 

sRed (sA =A tA′ ) := sRed (sA) = A sRed (tA)

sRed (Fo ⇒ Go) := sRed (Fo) ⇒ sRed (Go)

sRed (λx : A.s B ) := λx : A.sRed (sB )

sRed (( sRed (fΠx:AB )Πx:AB sRed (tA′ )A′ )B′ ) := ωB

if A̸ = A′ or B̸ = B′

Fig. 5. Definition of sRed (t).

This is aided by passing, for each term, a DHOL type A to the function, effectively associating them with a quasi-preimage. This is mainly necessary for 

λ-functions where there are potentially many quasi-preimages of differing types. To ensure correctness, it is, of course, required that an indexed term tA is of 26 R. Ranalter et al. 

type A and, if it is almost proper with a unique quasi-preimage, that the quasi-preimage has type A.Using the definition of the normalizing statement transformation, we can go on and state 

Lemma 2. Assume a well-typed DHOL theory T and a conjecture Γ ⊢T ϕ with 

Γ well-formed and ϕ well-typed. Assume a valid HOL derivation of Γ ⊢T ϕ.Then, we can index the terms in the derivations s.t. any steps S in the deriva-tion can be replaced by a macro-step (i.e. a step with the same assumptions and conclusion as the original step, composed of multiple micro-steps) for the nor-malizing statement transformation, replacing step S s.t. after replacing all steps with their macro-steps: 

– the resulting derivation is valid, 

– all terms occurring in the derivation are almost proper Remark 1 (A note about indices). It is reasonable to assume that the addition of type variables changes the indexing procedure, so we give the full (original) procedure here: Indexing starts at the end of the derivation. We pick identical indices for iden-tical terms. Whenever we need to index a constant or variable, and its preimage exists in the context of the DHOL conjecture, we pick the type of the preim-age. Term equalities always have the same index on both sides. For non-atomic terms t, we pick indices for the atomic subterms and choose for t a type of the unique (by Lemma 1) quasi-preimage, such that the indices match up. If pos-sible, we choose indices such that there exists a well-typed quasi-preimage of that type. Unless otherwise indexed, the index for sRed (tA) will also be A. For 

λ-functions that already have an index assigned, the variable and the body are assigned matching indices. If the λ function does not yet have an index, but is applied to an argument with an index, we assign that index to the variable of the λ-function. If none of these rules apply, we pick an arbitrary index that does not violate any of the future applications of the rules. Inspecting this algorithm, it becomes clear that it forbids at no point the choice of a type variable. Indeed, the labeling process is completely agnostic to the underlying set of types. Due to the fact that no changes to the definition of sRed are necessary, and the conjecture only talks about validity statements, we refer to the original proof in [29] for details. We will nevertheless give one example derivation to illustrate how the function interacts with the labels: 

Proof. The proof proceeds by induction on the inference rules, and we pick the beta rule as example: 

Γ ⊢T (λx : A.s ) t : BΓ ⊢T (λx : A.s ) t =B s[x/t ]beta Polymorphism Meets DHOL 27 

For the sake of clarity, we will use the substitution notation used by Rothgang et al. in [29]. Here t[x/u ] stands for the capture avoiding substitution of the term 

x with the term u in t.By assumption we get 

∆ ⊢T sRed (( λx A : A.s B ) tA)B′ : B. 

We proceed by case distinction on whether it is almost proper with quasi-preimage of type B ≡ B′:If it is, we get 

∆ ⊢T (( λx A : A.s B ) tA)B′ : B

by the first case in the definition of sRed . We apply the beta rule and the definition of sRed ’s first case twice and the equality case once to that result to get the goal 

∆ ⊢T sRed (( λx A : A.s B ) tA =B sB [xA/t A]) .

If not, we observe that 

sRed (( λx A : A.s B ) tA) = sRed (sRed (sB )[ xA/sRed (tA)]) = sRed (sB )[ xA/sRed (tA)] .

From reflexivity we have 

∆ ⊢T sRed (sB )[ xA/sRed (tA)] = B sRed (sB )[ xA/sRed (tA)] .

Due to the induction hypothesis and the choice of indices, we can assume that the sRed terms in the equality have a quasi-preimage of type B, and by several applications of the definition of sRed we conclude 

∆ ⊢T sRed (( λx A : A.s B ) tA =B sB [xA/t A]) .

Note how this transformed a single beta rule step into a macro-step. The derivation shows that even if during a regular proof step the statement would become unnormalizably spurious, we can transform the statements in a way that yields almost proper terms. 

B.3 Translation of HOL proofs into DHOL proofs 

Finally, we show the reflection of truth theorem. As previously, we give the general outline of the proof and refer to [29] for details. 

Proof. According to Lemma 2 we can assume that the proof of Γ ⊢T F is admissi-ble, as we can always transform a valid HOL proof into an admissible and valid HOL proof. Because admissibility implies the existence of a well-typed quasi-preimage and the fact that the translation is type-wise injective, we therefore have that the translated conjecture is a proper validity statement with unique quasi-preimage in DHOL. It remains to show that it is possible to lift the HOL derivation of the con-jecture to a DHOL derivation of its quasi-preimage. For that, we can inspect the 28 R. Ranalter et al. 

validity rules one for one and show that — assuming the conclusion is proper and has a quasi-preimage — all validity assumptions and their contexts are well-formed and proper respectively. From this, we continue to prove that in this case, the quasi-preimage of the conclusion of the rule is valid. As stated previously, the validity rules for the polymorphic extension do not change compared to their monomorphic variants. However, we now have to consider applied types. Inspecting the normalization function shows that nor-malizing constants applied to type arguments is the identity function. Therefore, there is no change in the validity of the proofs as performed in [29]. 

# C Red-Black Tree in PDHOL 

Following is the theory of red-black trees from our case study in PDHOL: 

color : type black : color red : color nat : type 0 : nat suc : nat → nat tree : ΠαΠc:color ,n :nat type leaf : Παtree α black 0

red _tree : ΠαΠn:nat tree α black n → α → tree α black n → tree α red n

black _tree : ΠαΠc1:color ,c 2:color ,n :nat tree α c 1 n → α → tree α c 2 n →

tree α black (suc n)

rev : ΠαΠc:color ,n :nat tree α c n → tree α c n ▷ ∀α : type .rev α black 0 ( leaf α) = leaf α▷ ∀α : type , x : α, n : nat , c 1 : color , c 2 : color , t 1 : tree α c 1 n, t 2 : tree α c 2 n. 

rev α black (suc n) ( black _tree α n c 1 c2 t1 x t 2) = 

black _tree α n c 2 c1 (rev α c 2 n t 2) x (rev α c 1 n t 1)

▷ ∀α : type , x : α, n : nat , t 1 : tree α black n, t 2 : tree α black n. 

rev α red n (red _tree α n t 1 x t 2) = 

red _tree α n (rev α black n t 2) x (rev α black n t 1)

From this various in-between steps, e.g. base cases and instanced induction schemes, were shown. In the interest of readability these results, as well as the induction axiom, are omitted here. Taking everything together, this allows us to proof the following involution lemma: 

▷ ∀α : type , n : nat , c : color , t : tree α c n. 

rev α c n (rev α c n t ) = t

# D Experimental Results 

TCOs with the entry “trivial” were equalities that could be dismissed by re-flexivity. “TO” represents a timeout, CA the SZS Status ContradictoryAxioms. Polymorphism Meets DHOL 29 Time to prove Time to prove File name Vampire Leo Zipper File name Vampire Leo Zipper 

rbt-rev-invol 13.48 TO TO list-app-assoc 13.37 TO TO ↰ TCO trivial trivial trivial 

> ↰

TCO 0.02 0.70 0.35 

-base 33.01 TO TO -TI TO TO TO ↰ TCO trivial trivial trivial 

> ↰

TCO 0.02 0.66 0.38 

-base-BTLeaf 0.08 TO TO -TI_alt 14.66 TO TO ↰ TCO trivial trivial trivial 

> ↰

TCO 0.02 0.81 0.36 

-base-RTLeaf 8.03 TO TO -base 5.18 TO TO ↰ TCO trivial trivial trivial 

> ↰

TCO 0.02 0.65 <0.01 

-base-lemma 18.01 TO TO -base-TI 10.83 TO TO ↰ 1.TCO 0.02 0.64 <0.01 

> ↰

TCO 0.02 0.47 <0.01 ↰ 2.TCO 0.02 0.67 <0.01 -indinst TO TO TO 

-subBTStep1 0.46 2.99 TO 

> ↰

1.TCO 0.02 0.54 <0.01 ↰ TCO trivial trivial trivial 

> ↰

2.TCO 0.02 0.72 1.81 

-subBTStep2 0.22 47.48 TO 

> ↰

3.TCO 0.02 0.90 1.29 ↰ TCO trivial trivial trivial 

> ↰

4.TCO 0.02 0.72 1.71 

-subBTStep3 0.08 2.80 2.32 -indinst-TI TO TO TO ↰ TCO trivial trivial trivial 

> ↰

1.TCO 0.02 0.56 <0.01 

-composedBTStep 10.62 TO TO 

> ↰

2.TCO 0.02 0.80 1.60 ↰ TCO trivial trivial trivial 

> ↰

3.TCO 0.02 0.78 1.34 

-BTStep 35.49 TO TO 

> ↰

4.TCO 0.02 0.76 1.70 ↰ TCO trivial trivial trivial -indstep1 10.56 TO TO 

-RTStep 5.67 TO TO 

> ↰

1.TCO 0.02 0.56 0.37 ↰ TCO trivial trivial trivial 

> ↰

2.TCO 0.02 1.93 0.69 

-indinst TO TO TO -indstep1-TI TO TO TO ↰ TCO trivial trivial trivial 

> ↰

1.TCO 0.02 0.63 0.50 

bad_tree TO TO TO 

> ↰

2.TCO 0.02 1.43 0.49 ↰ 1.TCO TO TO TO -indstep2 10.58 TO TO ↰ 2.TCO TO TO TO 

> ↰

1.TCO 0.02 0.64 0.40 

list-app-nil 1.39 TO TO 

> ↰

2.TCO 0.02 0.67 0.68 ↰ TCO 0.02 0.65 <0.01 indstep2-TI TO TO TO 

-base 0.02 TO 2.18 

> ↰

1.TCO 0.02 0.64 0.39 ↰ TCO 0.02 0.63 <0.01 

> ↰

2.TCO 0.02 1.20 0.39 

-indinst TO TO TO -indstep3 0.4 TO TO ↰ 1.TCO 0.02 0.60 <0.01 

> ↰

1.TCO 0.02 0.65 0.33 ↰ 2.TCO 0.02 0.64 <0.01 

> ↰

2.TCO 0.02 8.60 0.09 ↰ 3.TCO 0.02 0.67 <0.01 

> ↰

3.TCO 0.02 8.65 0.61 ↰ 4.TCO 0.02 0.72 <0.01 indstep3-TI 6.72 TO TO 

-indstep 5.27 TO TO 

> ↰

1.TCO 0.02 0.62 0.35 ↰ 1.TCO 0.02 0.55 <0.01 

> ↰

2.TCO 0.02 1.92 0.02 ↰ 2.TCO 0.02 0.52 <0.01 

> ↰

3.TCO 0.02 1.41 0.40 

list-rev-invol 11.15 TO TO -indstep4 1.43 2.69 TO ↰ TCO trivial trivial trivial 

> ↰

TCO 0.01 0.58 0.01 

-TI 8.55 TO TO -indstep4-TI 6.72 TO TO ↰ TCO trivial trivial trivial 

> ↰

TCO 0.02 0.53 0.02 

-step1 0.09 TO TO -indstep5 TO TO TO ↰ TCO 0.02 0.82 0.25 

> ↰

1.TCO 0.02 0.70 0.35 

-step1-TI 6.60 TO TO 

> ↰

2.TCO 0.03 1.22 0.74 ↰ TCO 0.02 0.75 0.19 

-step2 5.40 TO TO ↰ 1.TCO 0.02 0.56 0.35 ↰ 2.TCO 0.02 2.26 <0.01 30 R. Ranalter et al. 

-step2-TI 6.63 TO TO -indstep5-TI TO TO TO ↰ 1.TCO 0.02 0.80 0.29 

> ↰

1.TCO 0.02 0.71 0.35 ↰ 2.TCO 0.01 0.61 <0.01 

> ↰

2.TCO 0.02 1.45 0.41 

-step3 5.31 TO TO indstep5-TI_alt 0.18 TO TO ↰ 1.TCO 0.02 0.49 <0.01 

> ↰

1.TCO 0.02 0.63 0.48 ↰ 2.TCO 0.02 0.37 <0.01 

> ↰

2.TCO 0.02 0.86 0.42 

-step3-TI 6.60 TO TO inst-poly-matrix-add-com TO TO TO ↰ 1.TCO 0.02 0.56 <0.01 

> ↰

TCO trivial trivial trivial ↰ 2.TCO 0.02 0.60 <0.01 inst-poly-matrix-mul-com TO TO TO 

-step4 0.18 TO TO 

> ↰

TCO trivial trivial trivial ↰ TCO 0.02 0.56 <0.01 finite-type TO CA TO 

-step4-TI 6.60 TO TO ↰ TCO 0.02 0.56 <0.01 

-step5 0.02 TO 1.12 ↰ TCO trivial trivial trivial 

-step5-TI 6.62 TO TO ↰ TCO trivial trivial trivial 

-step5-TI_alt 0.03 TO 1.27 ↰ TCO trivial trivial trivial 

-TI stands for T ype I nstantiated and represent our experiments where type arguments are applied to polymorphic axioms and conjectures.