Title: SC-Taxo: Hierarchical Taxonomy Generation under Semantic Consistency Constraints using Large Language Models

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.00620v1

Published Time: Mon, 04 May 2026 00:49:22 GMT

Number of Pages: 12

Markdown Content:
# SC-Taxo: Hierarchical Taxonomy Generation under Semantic Consistency Constraints using Large Language Models 

Shiqiang Cai 1,2 * and Nianhong Niu 1,3 * and Shizhu He 1,3 † and Kang Liu 1,3 and Jun Zhao 1,3 

> 1

Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China 

> 2

University of Science and Technology Beijing, Beijing, China 

> 3

School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China 

shizhu.he@nlpr.ia.ac.cn 

Abstract 

Scientific literature is expanding at an unprece-dented pace, making it increasingly challeng-ing to efficiently organize and access domain knowledge. A high-quality scientific taxonomy offers a structured and hierarchical represen-tation of a research field, facilitating literature exploration and topic navigation, as well as en-abling downstream applications such as trend analysis, idea generation, and information re-trieval. However, existing taxonomy generation approaches often suffer from structural incon-sistencies and semantic misalignment across hierarchical levels. Through empirical analy-sis, we find that these issues largely stem from inadequate modeling of hierarchical semantic consistency. To address this limitation, we pro-pose a semantic-consistent taxonomy genera-tion ( SC-Taxo ) framework that leverages large language models (LLMs) with hierarchy-aware refinement stages to ensure semantic consis-tency. Specifically, SC-Taxo introduces a bidi-rectional heading generation mechanism that jointly performs bottom-up abstraction and top-down semantic constraint, while further cap-turing peer-level semantic dependencies to en-hance horizontal consistency. Experiments on multiple benchmark datasets demonstrate con-sistent improvements in hierarchy alignment and heading quality, and additional evaluation on Chinese scientific literature validates its ro-bust cross-lingual generalization. 

1 Introduction 

The rapid growth of scientific literature has signif-icantly increased the demand for structured and interpretable knowledge organization systems. Hi-erarchical taxonomies provide a principled way to organize scientific concepts into multi-level abstrac-tions, supporting terminology management and ontology engineering (Gruber, 1993; Uschold &   

> *Contributed equally to this work.
> †Corresponding author.

Grüninger, 1996). By structuring concepts through explicit parent–child relations, taxonomies enable coherent knowledge navigation and serve as a foun-dational structural backbone for downstream ana-lytical tasks such as trend analysis, idea generation, and information retrieval. As illustrated in Figure 1, the core task of scientific taxonomy generation aims to automatically transform an unstructured corpus of scientific papers into such a structured concept hierarchy. Existing taxonomy generation methods primar-ily fall into three categories: pattern-based extrac-tion, unsupervised clustering, and generative ap-proaches using large language models (LLMs). Early pattern-based methods relied on lexico-syntactic cues to extract relations (Hearst, 1992), while clustering algorithms group semantically re-lated papers based on distributional similarity in embedding spaces (Manning et al., 2008). Recently, owing to their strong summarization capabilities (Brown et al., 2020), LLMs have been increasingly employed to directly infer conceptual hierarchies and generate expressive node headings from large corpora (Hsu et al., 2024; Wan et al., 2024). However, these approaches frequently produce hierarchies that suffer from structural distortion and semantic drift. Pattern-based methods strug-gle with sparse coverage and limited robustness in heterogeneous corpora. Meanwhile, clustering algorithms operate purely on proximity in embed-ding space rather than conceptual abstraction, and purely LLM-based methods easily suffer from se-mantic hallucinations without structural grounding. Consequently, the induced hierarchies often exhibit granularity misalignment and context drift. For example, as illustrated in Figure 2, implementation-level items (e.g., “Python Code”) may incorrectly appear alongside higher-level research algorithms (e.g., “Faster R-CNN”) under a common parent node. Similarly, LLM-based generative methods can be easily hijacked by local contexts during 

> arXiv:2605.00620v1 [cs.CL] 1 May 2026 Figure 1: Illustration of the scientific taxonomy generation task. The goal is to automatically organize a collection of unstructured scientific papers into a hierarchical tree of concepts, where papers are semantically mapped to the appropriate conceptual nodes at varying levels of abstraction.
> Figure 2: Contrastive analysis of semantic and structural issues in traditional taxonomy construction. Traditional methods (left) suffer from context drift—e.g., misinterpreting the local keyword “mathematical concept” from an abstract to generate an out-of-domain node—and granularity misalignment (e.g., placing “Python Code” alongside algorithms). In contrast, the proposed SC-Taxo framework (right) corrects these errors and ensures semantic coherence through explicit cross-level constraints and peer-level coordination.

sub-categorization. For instance, when tasked with classifying papers under the “Supervised Learning” node, the model processes an SVM-related paper. Upon reading the abstract phrase “...SVM is a math-ematical concept...”, the model overfits to this local keyword and loses sight of the global algorithmic context. Consequently, it erroneously generates an out-of-domain intermediate node, “Mathematical Concepts”, directly under “Supervised Learning” to classify the paper, rather than correctly treating SVM as an algorithmic sub-category. This severe context drift disrupts the intended hierarchical pro-gression. The fundamental issue causing these structural and semantic failures is the inadequate modeling of hierarchical semantic consistency. Node relation-ships are often determined through shallow simi-larity metrics or isolated generative steps, which fail to explicitly enforce the top-down conceptual constraints and bottom-up semantic abstractions re-quired for a coherent taxonomy. Furthermore, the lack of peer-level coordination allows redundant or conceptually overlapping categories to emerge at the same hierarchical level, severely weakening interpretability. To address this limitation, we propose to integrate LLM-based reasoning into hierarchy-sensitive refinement stages, rather than treating language models as mere initial generators or post-hoc labeling tools. Our central premise is that se-mantic consistency must be explicitly constrained both vertically (across hierarchical levels) and hor-izontally (among sibling nodes). By decoupling the initial structural induction from deep semantic alignment, we can leverage the statistical stability of embedding-based clustering while harnessing the abstractive power of LLMs to correct semantic inconsistencies. Based on the above motivation, we introduce 

SC-Taxo (Semantic-Consistent Taxonomy Gen-eration) , a framework featuring a dual-path ini-tialization and a four-round deep fusion mecha-nism. Specifically, SC-Taxo introduces a bidirec-tional heading generation mechanism that jointly performs bottom-up abstraction from paper sets and top-down semantic constraints from parent nodes. Additionally, it incorporates peer-level se-mantic association modeling to capture horizontal contextual relationships, thereby reducing concep-tual redundancy among sibling nodes and ensuring strict granularity alignment. Extensive experiments on the English TaxoBench benchmark and a curated Chi-nese scientific literature dataset demonstrate that SC-Taxo achieves consistent and significant improvements in hierarchical structural alignment and heading semantic quality. Furthermore, the framework exhibits robust cross-lingual general-ization, effectively mitigating semantic collisions even in linguistically complex environments. In summary, the main contributions of this work are three-fold: • We propose SC-Taxo , a novel semantically con-sistent taxonomy generation framework that ex-plicitly mitigates structural distortion and context drift by decoupling the initial topological cluster-ing from LLM-driven semantic induction, ensur-ing that the generated hierarchy is grounded in both statistical structure and conceptual logic. • We introduce a deep fusion mechanism that en-forces holistic semantic consistency across the hi-erarchy; this includes bidirectional heading gen-eration for rigorous vertical (parent-child) align-ment and peer-level semantic association for hor-izontal (sibling) redundancy reduction and gran-ularity balancing. • We conduct comprehensive empirical evaluations on the TaxoBench benchmark and a curated Chi-nese scientific corpus, demonstrating that SC-Taxo significantly enhances structural isomor-phism (measured by Catalogue Edit Distance Similarity, CEDS) and semantic heading qual-ity (measured by Hierarchical Structure Reten-tion, HSR) while exhibiting robust cross-lingual generalization. 

2 Related Work 

2.1 Taxonomy and Ontology Learning from Text 

Constructing taxonomies from unstructured text has long relied on linguistic patterns (e.g., Hearst patterns) and graph-based modeling to extract hypernym-hyponym relations (Hearst, 1992; Cimi-ano et al., 2005). Subsequent data-driven methods leveraged term co-occurrence and semantic net-works to improve scalability (Velardi et al., 2013). To overcome the sparse coverage of rule-based sys-tems, clustering-based techniques were adopted to organize papers into multi-level structures based on embedding similarity (Manning et al., 2008). Re-cent studies have further explored hybrid symbolic-statistical frameworks to balance scalability with semantic interpretability (Shen et al., 2020; del Águila Escobar et al., 2025). Despite these ad-vancements, these methods often lack explicit se-mantic abstraction, resulting in interpretable node descriptions that remain shallow or disconnected from the global context. Our work addresses these limitations by moving beyond pattern matching and statistical co-occurrence; SC-Taxo employs LLMs to perform deep semantic induction, ensuring that every extracted concept is grounded in both local paper content and global hierarchical constraints. 

2.2 Hierarchical Clustering for Scientific Literature 

Hierarchical clustering provides a foundational mechanism for inducing tree-structured representa-tions from paper similarity matrices (Ward, 1963). With the emergence of neural text representations, embedding-based hierarchical clustering has be-come a dominant paradigm, effectively capturing coarse topical organization in large-scale scien-tific corpora (Cohan et al., 2020; Ayoughi et al., 2025). However, pure clustering-based hierarchies often fail to produce semantically meaningful inter-nal nodes, yielding vague labels and inconsistent parent-child abstraction levels (Shen et al., 2020). While recent research has shifted towards semantic-guided and structure-aware clustering strategies (Yang et al., 2025; Patil et al., 2025), a fundamen-tal gap remains in maintaining structural stability while refining semantic coherence. In contrast to these approaches, SC-Taxo explicitly decouples the topological clustering path from the semantic label-ing path. By treating the cluster tree as a structural scaffold, our framework allows for a four-round deep fusion process that corrects granularity mis-alignment and ensures consistent conceptual depth across the hierarchy. 

2.3 LLMs for Taxonomy Generation 

The rapid advancement of Large Language Models (LLMs) has enabled new paradigms for structured knowledge induction and concept labeling (Zhu et al., 2023; Wan et al., 2024). Frameworks that in-corporate LLMs into both heading generation and hierarchy refinement stages have shown promise in improving structural coherence (Hsu et al., 2024; Pan et al., 2025; Lin et al., 2025). Nevertheless, treating LLMs as isolated generators or post-hoc la-belers without rigid structural grounding frequently leads to “semantic drift” and “hallucinated” nodes that overfit to local abstracts. Our framework di-rectly tackles these challenges by enforcing holis-tic semantic consistency through a bidirectional heading generation mechanism. Unlike previous LLM-based methods that focus on isolated genera-tion, SC-Taxo jointly models vertical (parent-child) alignment and horizontal (sibling) peer-level asso-ciations, effectively eliminating redundancy and ensuring a compact, semantically coherent taxon-omy. 

3 Materials and Methods 

The proposed SC-Taxo framework is designed to address the pervasive issues of semantic drift and structural hallucination in taxonomy generation. By decoupling structural induction from semantic generation, the framework ensures that the result-ing hierarchy is grounded in both the statistical topology of the paper space and the high-level ab-stractive reasoning of Large Language Models. As shown in Figure 3, the pipeline takes a scien-tific corpus D (comprising titles and abstracts) as input and processes it through four integrated mod-ules: Initial Hierarchical Clustering, Concept Con-struction, Deep Fusion (four Rounds), and Quality Control. 

3.1 Dual-Path Initialization: Clustering and Concept Construction 

To prevent LLMs from generating ungrounded or hallucinated structures, SC-Taxo initiates the pro-cess via two parallel paths that capture complemen-tary aspects of the domain knowledge. 

Initial Hierarchical Clustering (Structural Path): This path constructs a reliable structural backbone for the taxonomy. Papers are first en-coded into dense semantic embeddings. To pre-serve the non-linear local topological structure of the paper space, we apply Uniform Manifold Ap-proximation and Projection (UMAP) for dimen-sionality reduction. Subsequently, a recursive Breadth-First Search (BFS) hierarchical clustering algorithm partitions the papers into a structural Cluster Tree Tcluster . While Tcluster provides a sta-ble scaffold, it lacks interpretable semantic labels at this stage. 

Concept Construction (Semantic Path): In par-allel, an LLM extracts key technical concepts directly from the paper abstracts. Following a phase of merging and filtering (e.g., removing low-frequency terms and normalizing synonyms), the LLM organizes these concepts into a preliminary Concept Tree Tconcept . This tree is rich in seman-tic meaning but potentially suffers from structural instability if used as a standalone representation. 

3.2 Deep Fusion (Four-Round Validation) 

The core innovation of SC-Taxo lies in the Deep Fusion module, which aligns the structural Tcluster 

with the semantic Tconcept through a rigorous four-round mutual validation process to ensure holistic hierarchical consistency. 

Round 1: Concepts → Clusters (Conceptual Grounding). This round validates whether LLM-generated concepts are grounded in the actual paper distribution. For each concept, the framework eval-uates the cluster concentration of its associated pa-pers. Concepts whose associated papers are highly concentrated within specific clusters are retained, while overly dispersed or “hallucinated” concepts are filtered out. 

Round 2: Clusters → Concepts (Semantic Labeling). Reliable semantic labels are assigned to the structural clusters by analyzing the high-frequency validated concepts within each cluster’s paper subset. The most representative concept is selected as the cluster’s heading. Clusters lacking clear conceptual support are flagged for recursive re-clustering to maintain structural purity. 

Round 3: Parent-Child Alignment (Vertical Consistency). To enforce strict vertical semantic coherence, the framework refines hierarchical titles using a bidirectional mechanism. When generating a title for a child node, the LLM is conditioned on: (1) the root title (global constraint), (2) the parent node’s title (local hierarchical constraint), and (3) the child node’s paper subset (content grounding). This multi-level conditioning prevents the semantic drift common in unidirectional generation. 

Round 4: Sibling Expansion (Horizontal Con-sistency). To enhance horizontal contextual co-herence and eliminate redundancy, the framework models peer-level semantic associations. When completing a category, the LLM is provided with existing sibling topics and is explicitly prompted to identify missing technical concepts while ensur-ing no conceptual overlap or granularity mismatch with the established siblings. Figure 3: Overall architecture of the proposed SC-Taxo framework. The pipeline features a dual-path initialization: Initial Hierarchical Clustering constructs a structural backbone, while Concept Construction builds a semantic tree. These paths are integrated through a Deep Fusion module comprising four-round validation (Concepts →

Clusters, Clusters → Concepts, Parent-Child Alignment, and Sibling Expansion). Finally, a Quality Control module applies concept scoring, redundancy detection, and structure checking to output the refined, semantically coherent taxonomy. 

3.3 Quality Control and Output 

Prior to outputting the refined taxonomy T ∗, SC-Taxo applies a rigorous Quality Control module to ensure structural compactness and semantic com-pleteness: 1. Concept Scoring: An LLM scores each con-cept (from 1 to 10) based on technical speci-ficity, paper coverage, and semantic consis-tency. Nodes falling below a predefined qual-ity threshold are pruned. 2. Redundancy Detection: The framework leverages embedding similarity and LLM ver-ification to detect redundant pairs (e.g., syn-onyms or subsumed concepts), retaining only the most complete terminology. 3. Structure Checking: The final tree under-goes structural balancing (e.g., depth and branching factor validation) to ensure it is hier-archically aligned and semantically coherent. The complete step-by-step workflow of the pro-posed SC-Taxo framework is summarized in Algo-rithm 1. 

3.4 Dataset and Benchmark 

We evaluate the proposed framework on the TaxoBench benchmark, which provides expert-annotated hierarchical taxonomies for scientific lit-erature collections (Zhu et al., 2023). Each bench-mark instance consists of a survey paper, its refer-enced papers, and a manually curated taxonomy structure. Following standard practice, papers are represented using their titles and abstracts. 

Algorithm 1 Semantic-Consistent Taxonomy Gen-eration (SC-Taxo) 

Require: Paper set D, Pretrained Encoder Enc ,LLM generative functions 

Ensure: Refined Taxonomy Tree T ∗ 

> 1:

Phase 1: Dual-Path Initialization  

> 2:

E ← Enc (D) 

> 3:

Tcluster ← UMAP_BFS_Clustering (E)

{Structural Path}  

> 4:

C ← LLM_Extract_Concepts (D) 

> 5:

Tconcept ← LLM_Induce_Hierarchy (C) {Se-mantic Path}  

> 6:

Phase 2: Deep Fusion (Four-Round Valida-tion)  

> 7:

Cvalid ← Validate_Concepts_via_Clusters (C, T cluster )

{Round 1}  

> 8:

Tlabeled ←

Label_Clusters_with_Concepts (Tcluster , C valid )

{Round 2}  

> 9:

Taligned ←

Bidirectional_Alignment (Tlabeled ) {Round 3: Parent-Child}  

> 10:

Texpanded ← Expand_Siblings (Taligned )

{Round 4: Peer-level}  

> 11:

Phase 3: Quality Control  

> 12:

Tscored ← Score_Concepts (Texpanded ) 

> 13:

T ∗ ← Remove_Redundancy (Tscored ) 

> 14:

return T ∗

To assess cross-lingual generalization, we ad-ditionally curated a Chinese scientific literature dataset derived from a comprehensive domain sur-vey focusing on the intersection of Large Lan-guage Models (LLMs) and Reinforcement Learn-ing (RL) agents. This dataset comprises 59 re-search papers, with the ground-truth hierarchical taxonomy expertly annotated based on the original survey’s structure. Compared to English corpora, Chinese scientific literature often exhibits implicit topic boundaries, higher semantic ambiguity, and less standardized terminology, making taxonomy generation more challenging (Ruder et al., 2019). The annotation schema follows the principles of TaxoBench to ensure comparability, and identical evaluation metrics are applied across languages. 

3.5 Implementation Details and Reproducibility 

All large language model interactions in our frame-work are implemented through prompt-based gen-eration and evaluation. To avoid introducing ad-ditional variability, the same base LLM is used consistently across heading generation, semantic alignment, and refinement stages. For paper representation, paper titles and ab-stracts are concatenated and encoded using a fixed pre-trained embedding model. The resulting dense embeddings are used exclusively for the initial hier-archical clustering stage and are not updated during subsequent processing. During bidirectional heading generation, bottom-up abstraction and top-down refinement are each performed once per node, following a strictly sin-gle bottom-up pass and a single top-down pass through the taxonomy. Parent–child semantic con-sistency is evaluated using soft alignment crite-ria, implemented via LLM-based textual scoring or embedding-based similarity, depending on avail-ability. Peer-level semantic associations are computed only among sibling nodes at the same hierarchy level and are used as auxiliary semantic signals during refinement. Crucially, they do not alter the foundational hierarchical structure induced by the clustering path. All hyperparameters, including the UMAP di-mensionality, BFS clustering depth, and LLM vali-dation thresholds, are kept strictly fixed across all experiments. Furthermore, the identical prompt-ing templates and evaluation criteria are applied to both the English and Chinese datasets to ensure fair cross-lingual comparison and full reproducibility. 

4 Results 

4.1 Evaluation Metrics 

We evaluate taxonomy quality using a comprehen-sive set of both flat clustering and hierarchy-aware metrics. To assess paper-level clustering consis-tency, we employ Normalized Mutual Information (NMI) and Purity. To rigorously evaluate the hierarchical structural alignment and semantic quality, we utilize two specialized metrics introduced in the TaxoBench framework (Zhu et al., 2023): 

Catalogue Edit Distance Similarity (CEDS): 

This metric measures the structural and seman-tic isomorphism between the predicted taxonomy 

Tpred and the ground truth Tgt . It computes the min-imum tree edit distance—allowing node insertion, deletion, and semantic-aware substitution—strictly normalized by the maximum tree size. 

Hierarchical Structure Retention (HSR): 

HSR evaluates how well the ancestral relationships among papers are preserved. It computes the sym-metric bounded ratio of the Lowest Common An-cestor (LCA) depths for paper pairs in Tpred com-pared to their corresponding depths in Tgt .Together, CEDS and HSR explicitly quantify the improvements in hierarchical coherence and abstraction depth achieved by our proposed frame-work. 

4.2 Compared Baselines 

To demonstrate the superiority of SC-Taxo, we compare it against a diverse set of state-of-the-art taxonomy generation and clustering methods, cate-gorized into three groups: • Pure LLM-based Methods : Methods that directly prompt LLMs to generate taxonomies or clusters, including CHIME (Hsu et al., 2024) (which iteratively abstracts concepts) and TnT-LLM (Wan et al., 2024) / GoalEx (Wang et al., 2023) (which generate goal-driven hierarchical clusters based on textual representations). • Clustering-incorporated Methods : Ap-proaches that use traditional clustering as a structural backbone. We compare against Knowledge Navigator (KN) (Katz et al., 2024) and SCYCHIC (Gao et al., 2025), which lever-age paper embeddings for structural induction prior to label assignment. Table 1: Performance comparison of different taxonomy generation methods on the TaxoBench benchmark.                                  

> Method Categorization Structure
> NMI Purity CEDS HSR
> Pure LLM-based
> CHIME 35.4 41.8 23.3 74.7 TnT-LLM 51.6 57.6 19.1 69.9 GoalEx 46.7 47.6 23.2 70.5
> Clustering-incorporated
> KN 44.7 42.4 18.8 49.5 SCYCHIC 49.8 50.6 23.0 66.4
> LLM-Guided Multi-Aspect Clustering
> CAM-Taxo 60.1 62.2 23.8 74.5 SC-Taxo (Ours) 50.2 64.8 28.7 75.3

• LLM-Guided Multi-Aspect Clustering :The most competitive recent baselines, such as CAM-Taxo (Zhu et al., 2025), which inte-grate LLM reasoning to guide the clustering process along specific semantic dimensions. 

4.3 Main Results on English TaxoBench Benchmark 

As shown in Table 1, the results on the TaxoBench benchmark demonstrate that the proposed SC-Taxo framework significantly outperforms existing base-lines, particularly in structural alignment (CEDS) and paper categorization quality (Purity). When analyzing the categorization metrics, SC-Taxo achieves the highest Purity score (64.8), sur-passing even the highly competitive CAM-Taxo (62.2). This substantial gain indicates that our Deep Fusion module—specifically the mechanism that validates LLM-extracted concepts against actual cluster concentrations—effectively filters out hallu-cinated or overly broad topics, ensuring that papers assigned to a specific node share a highly cohesive semantic focus. Interestingly, while our NMI (50.2) is slightly lower than that of CAM-Taxo (60.1), this is a deliberate trade-off. NMI strictly evaluates flat paper partitioning, whereas SC-Taxo is optimized for hierarchical abstraction. By sacrificing a mi-nor degree of flat clustering agreement, our frame-work avoids over-fragmenting papers into granular, semantically meaningless sub-clusters, which ulti-mately benefits the global taxonomy structure. The most striking improvements are observed in the hierarchy-aware metrics. SC-Taxo establishes a new state-of-the-art CEDS score of 28.7, out-performing the best baseline by nearly 5 absolute percentage points. Pure LLM-based methods like CHIME and TnT-LLM struggle to construct stable global trees (CEDS around 19-23) because they 

Table 2: Performance comparison on the Chinese TaxoBench benchmark.                      

> Method Categorization Structure
> NMI Purity CEDS HSR
> Pure LLM-based
> GoalEx 30.3 38.1 14.8 23.5
> Clustering-incorporated
> KN 25.9 32.2 21.5 46.2
> LLM-Guided Multi-Aspect Clustering
> CAM-Taxo 52.2 55.9 20.6 50.2 SC-Taxo (Ours) 30.4 66.7 29.8 51.5

lack topological grounding. Conversely, clustering-incorporated methods like KN suffer from weak label semantics (HSR: 49.5). Our dual-path archi-tecture bridges this gap: the bidirectional head-ing generation acts as a strict semantic regular-izer, ensuring that child nodes strictly inherit con-straints from parent nodes while accurately sum-marizing their own papers. Consequently, SC-Taxo not only generates more semantically reliable ab-stractions (HSR: 75.3) but also ensures that the overall tree isomorphism is highly consistent with human-curated expert taxonomies. 

4.4 Cross-lingual Evaluation on Chinese Scientific Literature 

Evaluating taxonomy generation across languages is critical for assessing whether a framework mod-els deep semantic structure rather than relying on language-specific surface lexical patterns. Scien-tific literature in Chinese poses unique and severe challenges, including implicit topic boundaries, highly compound terminological variability, and weaker standardization compared to English cor-pora. To rigorously evaluate performance under these challenging zero-shot conditions, we conducted ex-periments on a curated Chinese dataset focused on the intersection of Large Language Models (LLMs) and Reinforcement Learning (RL) agents. The ground-truth taxonomy for this dataset was expertly annotated based on a comprehensive domain sur-vey, encompassing a complex hierarchy of tasks such as reward shaping, state representation, and policy optimization. Table 2 presents the quantitative comparison be-tween our SC-Taxo framework and competitive baselines on this Chinese corpus. The results re-veal a catastrophic degradation in traditional gen-erative methods. For instance, GoalEx struggles immensely with the terminological ambiguity of Chinese text, yielding a heavily fragmented tree with a remarkably low CEDS score of 14.8 and an HSR of 23.5. This highlights the vulnerability of pure generative pipelines when applied to non-English scientific domains where standard prompt formulations lose their structural efficacy. In stark contrast, the proposed SC-Taxo frame-work maintains highly robust performance across the language barrier, achieving state-of-the-art structural alignment (CEDS: 29.8) and preserv-ing high semantic heading accuracy (HSR: 51.5). The reason for this robust cross-lingual general-ization lies in our decoupled architecture. The UMAP+BFS structural path provides a language-agnostic topological anchor based purely on dense embeddings, preventing the hierarchy from collaps-ing. Meanwhile, the peer-level semantic associ-ation module explicitly checks for conceptual re-dundancy, effectively resolving the synonym colli-sions that frequently occur in Chinese terminology. Furthermore, achieving the highest Purity (66.7) among all baselines confirms that our multi-round deep fusion mechanism successfully mitigates con-text drift, proving that SC-Taxo captures universal conceptual regularities rather than overfitting to English-centric syntax. 

4.5 Ablation Study on Framework Components 

To rigorously evaluate the contribution of each core component in the SC-Taxo framework, we conduct a component-wise ablation study on the TaxoBench benchmark. Rather than treating the framework as a monolithic black box, this ablation analysis sys-tematically dissects the synergistic effects between the structural backbone and the LLM-driven seman-tic refinement modules. The evaluation focuses on three key metrics: • CEDS , measuring hierarchical structural alignment; • HSR , reflecting heading semantic accuracy; • Purity , indicating paper-level clustering con-sistency. We compare the full SC-Taxo model against four distinct variants to isolate the impact of each spe-cific design choice: 1. BU-only (Bottom-Up only): Retains only the structural clustering path, completely dis-abling the top-down concept extraction and all subsequent fusion steps; 28.7               

> 23.7 25.1 24.7 24.5
> 75.3
> 65.8 65.6 65.9 66.1 64.8 63.7 63.9 64.2 64.2
> Full BU_only —Bi-Heading —Peer-Association —LLM-Refine
> 0
> 10
> 20
> 30
> 40
> 50
> 60
> 70
> 80
> CEDS
> CEDS
> HSR
> Purity

Figure 4: Ablation results on the TaxoBench benchmark. The substantial performance gap between BU-only, w/o Bi, and the Full model highlights the critical necessity of both the dual-path architecture and the bidirectional validation mechanism. 

2. w/o Bi (w/o Bidirectional Validation): Re-tains both the clustering and concept paths but removes the bidirectional validation mecha-nism; 3. w/o Peer (w/o Sibling Expansion): Disables the horizontal semantic expansion among peer nodes; 4. w/o Refine (w/o Quality Filtering): Re-moves the final LLM-driven quality scoring and redundancy elimination module. The evaluation results across structural and se-mantic metrics are presented in Figure 4. Over-all, the full SC-Taxo framework achieves the best performance across all metrics (e.g., CEDS: 28.7, HSR: 75.3, Purity: 64.8), validating the effective-ness of our holistic dual-path design. 

4.5.1 The Necessity of Dual-Path and Bidirectional Validation 

The BU-only variant, which completely removes the top-down LLM concept path and relies solely on structural paper features, yields the lowest over-all performance (CEDS drops to 23.7, Purity to 63.7). This confirms that traditional bottom-up clustering struggles to capture high-level semantic abstractions. When the concept path is introduced but without bidirectional validation ( w/o Bi ), the semantic alignment (CEDS) slightly improves to 25.1. However, it still falls significantly short of the full model (28.7). This substantial performance gap (28.7 vs. 25.1) is crucial: it demonstrates that merely injecting LLM concepts is insufficient. Without bidirectional validation acting as a bridge to resolve the heterogeneity between structural clus-ters and semantic concepts, the taxonomy suffers from semantic collisions. The deep fusion mecha-nism is therefore essential for ensuring hierarchical consistency. 

4.5.2 Impact of Quality Refinement 

Removing the LLM-driven refinement module ( w/o Refine ) causes a sharp decline in CEDS (from 28.7 to 24.5) and Purity (from 64.8 to 64.2). This em-pirical evidence confirms that our post-processing step effectively filters out noisy labels and reduces conceptual redundancy, ensuring strict semantic consistency between the generated headings and their constituent papers. 

4.5.3 Impact of Peer-level Expansion 

Finally, disabling the horizontal sibling expansion (w/o Peer ) leads to a notable decrease in CEDS (to 24.7) and HSR (from 75.3 to 65.9). This highlights that explicitly modeling peer-level associations is critical for discovering latent relationships among sibling nodes, thereby maximizing the semantic coverage and structural completeness of the taxon-omy. 

4.6 Case Study: Qualitative Analysis 

To intuitively demonstrate the superiority of our proposed framework over existing LLM-based tax-onomy generation methods, we conduct a quali-tative case study on a subset of papers related to “Model Compression”. Figure 5 visualizes the tax-onomy sub-trees generated by the baseline method and our SC-Taxo. As shown in Figure 5(a), the baseline approach exhibits granularity mismatch and structural imbal-ance. On one hand, it generates empty categories without paper support (e.g., “structured pruning” and “weight quantization”) while improperly lump-ing distinct papers together (e.g., misclassifying P3 alongside P2 and P13 under “unstructured prun-ing”). On the other hand, it suffers from over-fragmentation by creating a redundant single-child node (“offline knowledge distillation”), making the taxonomy unnecessarily deep and complex. In contrast, Figure 5(b) illustrates the refined taxonomy generated by SC-Taxo. Driven by the four-round Deep Fusion and Quality Control mod-ules, our framework successfully resolves these is-sues. First, it ensures strict semantic alignment by correctly differentiating paper contexts, moving P3 into “structured pruning” and accurately populating “weight quantization” with relevant papers (P1 and P13). Second, it mitigates over-fragmentation by collapsing the redundant “offline knowledge distil-lation” node, assigning P25 directly to “Knowledge Distillation”. Finally, through peer-level semantic association, SC-Taxo successfully identifies and expands a critical missing sibling category, “NAS” (Neural Architecture Search), resulting in a more comprehensive, compact, and structurally balanced taxonomy. 

4.7 Analysis of Key Metrics 

As shown in the experimental results, the proposed framework achieves higher scores on Purity and CEDS compared to baseline methods. In particu-lar, the improvement in CEDS indicates that the generated taxonomy exhibits better global struc-tural alignment with the reference hierarchy. This suggests that explicitly modeling parent–child se-mantic consistency contributes to more coherent hierarchical organization, even when the underly-ing paper clustering is not further optimized. The framework also shows a modest but consis-tent improvement in HSR. Although the absolute gain is limited, the increase indicates that the gener-ated headings are slightly closer to the ground-truth concepts. This suggests that the refinement and filtering stage improves semantic precision with-out introducing aggressive abstraction, thereby fa-voring stable and reliable heading generation over marginal lexical optimization. By contrast, NMI scores are lower than those of some baseline methods. Since this metric pri-marily reflects paper-level clustering agreement, the decrease indicates that the proposed framework does not prioritize optimizing flat clustering consis-tency. Instead, the method deliberately trades off paper-level clustering performance for improved hi-erarchical coherence and semantic interpretability, which are more critical for conceptual taxonomy construction. Overall, the results demonstrate that improve-ments in hierarchical alignment and semantic con-sistency can be achieved without optimizing tradi-tional clustering metrics, highlighting the practical effectiveness of the proposed framework for con-structing interpretable conceptual hierarchies. 

5 Discussion 

The experimental results indicate that semantic con-sistency, rather than clustering optimization alone, (a) Generated by (Zhu et al., 2025) (b) Generated by SC-Taxo (Ours) 

> Figure 5: Qualitative comparison of taxonomies generated for the topic “Model Compression”. (a) The baseline method suffers from unbalanced granularity. (b) Our proposed SC-Taxo ensures structural compactness by collapsing redundant levels and corrects paper assignments.

plays a decisive role in constructing interpretable conceptual hierarchies. By integrating bidirectional heading alignment and peer-level semantic model-ing, the proposed framework reduces hierarchical semantic drift while maintaining structural stability (Mishra et al., 2025; Patil et al., 2025). The abla-tion analysis further confirms that different mod-ules contribute complementary improvements to alignment and semantic precision. A remaining limitation lies in the computational overhead introduced by multi-stage LLM invoca-tion. Future work may explore lightweight consis-tency estimation strategies or adaptive refinement mechanisms to balance efficiency and semantic ro-bustness. 

6 Conclusion 

This study presents SC-Taxo, a semantic-consistent framework for hierarchy taxonomy generation in scientific literature. By decoupling structural induc-tion from semantic refinement, the framework com-bines embedding-based hierarchical clustering with bidirectional heading alignment, peer-level associa-tion modeling, and LLM-driven validation. Experi-mental results demonstrate improved hierarchical alignment and heading semantic quality, particu-larly in CEDS and HSR, while maintaining stable clustering behavior. Cross-lingual evaluation fur-ther shows that the framework generalizes across languages, indicating that it captures language-agnostic conceptual regularities. The findings high-light the importance of explicitly modeling hierar-chical semantics in taxonomy construction. Future work may extend the framework to more flexible graph structures and explore efficiency-aware se-mantic refinement strategies. 

Conflicts of Interest 

The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest. 

References        

> Artetxe M, Schwenk H. Massively multilingual sentence embeddings for zero-shot cross-lingual transfer and beyond. Transactions of the Association for Compu-tational Linguistics , 2019; 7: 597–610. Ayoughi M, Mettes P, Groth P. Minimizing Hyperbolic Embedding Distortion with LLM-Guided Hierarchy Restructuring. In: Proceedings of the 13th Knowl-edge Capture Conference 2025 , 2025: 123–130. Buitelaar P, Cimiano P, Magnini B. Ontology learning from text: Methods, evaluation and applications. IOS Press , 2005. Brown T B, Mann B, Ryder N, et al. Language mod-els are few-shot learners. Advances in Neural In-formation Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2020; 33 :1877–1901. Chen H, Shen X, Lv Q, Wang J, Ni X, Ye J. SAC-KG: Exploiting Large Language Models as Skilled Auto-matic Constructors for Domain Knowledge Graph. In:
> Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the As-sociation for Computational Linguistics (ACL 2024) ,2024: 4345–4360. Cimiano P, Hotho A, Staab S. Learning concept hierar-chies from text corpora using formal concept analysis.
> Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research , 2005; 24 :305–339.

Cimiano P. Ontology Learning from Text. Springer ,2006. Cohan A, Feldman S, Beltagy I, Downey D, Weld D S. SPECTER: Document-level representation learning using citation-informed transformers. In: Proceed-ings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics , 2020: 2270–2282. del Águila Escobar R A, del Carmen Suárez-Figueroa M, Fernández López M, Villazón Terrazas B. Bridg-ing Text and Knowledge: Explainable AI for Knowl-edge Graph Classification and Concept Map-Based Semantic Domain Discovery with OBOE Framework. 

Appl. Sci. , 2025; 15 (22): 12231. Fortuna B, Lavraˇ c N. Ontology learning from text: A survey. Knowledge and Information Systems , 2009; 

19 (1): 1–35. Gao M, Shah J, Wang W, Khashabi D. Science Hier-archography: Hierarchical Organization of Science Literature. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.13834 , 2025. Gruber TR. A translation approach to portable ontology specifications. Knowledge Acquisition , 1993; 5(2): 199–220. Hearst M A. Automatic acquisition of hyponyms from large text corpora. In: Proceedings of the 14th Inter-national Conference on Computational Linguistics (COLING) , 1992: 539–545. Hsu C-C, Bransom E, Sparks J, et al. CHIME: LLM-assisted hierarchical organization of scientific studies for literature review support. In: Findings of the As-sociation for Computational Linguistics (ACL) , 2024: 118–132. Ilman R, Rahman M, Rahman S. CUET_Zenith at LLMs4OL 2025 Task C: Hybrid Embedding-LLM Architectures for Taxonomy Discovery. Open Con-ference Proceedings , 2025; 6: 2896. Jamatia A, Mitra P, Hovy E H. TaxoAdapt: Aligning LLM-Based Multidimensional Taxonomy Construc-tion to Evolving Research Corpora. In: Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) ,2025: 25911–25928. Ji S, Pan S, Cambria E, et al. A survey on knowledge graphs: Representation, acquisition, and applications. 

IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems , 2022; 33 (2): 494–514. Katz U, Levy M, Goldberg Y. Knowledge Navigator: LLM-guided browsing framework for exploratory search in scientific literature. In: Findings of the Con-ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) , 2024: 8838–8855. Lin N, et al. Building Data-Driven Occupation Tax-onomies: A Bottom-Up Multi-Stage Approach via Semantic Clustering and Multi-Agent Collaboration. In: Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing: Industry Track (EMNLP 2025) , 2025. Maedche A, Staab S. Ontology learning for the semantic web. IEEE Intelligent Systems , 2001; 16 (2): 72–79. Manning C D, Raghavan P, Schütze H. Introduction to Information Retrieval. Cambridge University Press ,2008. Mishra S, Patni A, Chatterjee N, Chakraborty T. Quan-Taxo: A quantum approach to self-supervised tax-onomy expansion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.14011 ,2025. Navigli R, Velardi P, Faralli S. A graph-based algo-rithm for inducing lexical taxonomies from scratch. In: Proceedings of the International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI) , 2011: 1872–1877. Patil S, Zhang Z, Huang Y, Ma T, Xu M. Hy-perbolic large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.05757 , 2025. Pan H, Zhang Q, Adamu M, Dragut E, Latecki L J. Taxonomy-Driven Knowledge Graph Construc-tion for Domain-Specific Scientific Applications. In: 

Findings of the Association for Computational Lin-guistics: ACL 2025 , 2025: 4295–4320. Reimers N, Gurevych I. Sentence-BERT: Sentence em-beddings using Siamese BERT-networks. In: Pro-ceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Meth-ods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th In-ternational Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) , 2019: 3982–3992. Ruder S, Vuli´ c I, Søgaard A. A survey of cross-lingual word embedding models. Journal of Artificial Intelli-gence Research , 2019; 65 : 569–631. Shen J, Ma X, Zhang H, Li J. Taxonomy construction for scientific literature. Knowledge-Based Systems ,2020; 191 : 105240. Tabatabaei S A, Fancher S, Parsons M, Askari A. Can Large Language Models Serve as Effective Classi-fiers for Hierarchical Multi-Label Classification of Scientific Papers at Industrial Scale? In: Proceedings of the 2025 International Conference on Computa-tional Linguistics (COLING 2025) , 2025: 167–179. Uschold M, Grüninger M. Ontologies: Principles, meth-ods and applications. Knowledge Engineering Re-view , 1996; 11 (2): 93–136. Velardi P, Faralli S, Navigli R. OntoLearn Reloaded: A graph-based algorithm for taxonomy induction. 

Computational Linguistics , 2013; 39 (3): 665–707. Vu B, Naik R G, Nguyen B K, Mehraeen S, Hemmje M. Automated taxonomy construction using large language models: A comparative study of fine-tuning and prompt engineering. Eng , 2025; 6(11): 283. Wan M, Safavi T, Jauhar SK, et al. TnT-LLM: Text mining at scale with large language models. In: 

Proceedings of the ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD) , 2024: 5836–5847. Wang Z, Shang J, Zhong R. Goal-driven explainable clustering via language descriptions. In: Proceed-ings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) , 2023: 10626–10649. Ward J H. Hierarchical Grouping to Optimize an Ob-jective Function. Journal of the American Statistical Association , 1963; 58 (301): 236–244. Yang D, Zhang X, Han T, Liu Y. Semantic enrichment of neural word embeddings: Leveraging taxonomic sim-ilarity for enhanced distributional semantics. Natural Language Processing , 2025; 31 (6): 1423–1449. Zhang H, Zhu Z, Zhang Z, Li C. LLMTaxo: Leveraging Large Language Models for Constructing Taxonomy of Factual Claims from Social Media. In: Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2025 , 2025: 19627–19641. Zang Q, Zgrzendek C, Tchappi I, Khadangi A, Sedlmeir J. KG-HTC: Integrating knowledge graphs into LLMs for effective zero-shot hierarchical text classi-fication. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.05583 , 2025. Zhang Y, Chen X, Meng Y, et al. Hierarchical metadata-aware document categorization under weak supervi-sion. In: Proceedings of the ACM International Con-ference on Web Search and Data Mining (WSDM) ,2021: 770–778. Zhang Y, Xu W, Yu Z, Reformat M Z. Construction of topic hierarchy with subtree representation for knowledge graphs. Axioms , 2025; 14 (4): 300. Zhu K, Feng X, Feng X, et al. Hierarchical catalogue generation for literature review: A benchmark. In: 

Findings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) , 2023: 6790–6804. Zhu K, Liao L, Gu Y, et al. Context-aware hierarchi-cal taxonomy generation for scientific papers via LLM-guided multi-aspect clustering. In: Proceed-ings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) , 2025: 15627–15645.