Title: Towards Knowledgeable Deep Research: Framework and Benchmark

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.07720v1

Published Time: Fri, 10 Apr 2026 00:25:09 GMT

Number of Pages: 11

Markdown Content:
# Towards Knowledgeable Deep Research: Framework and Benchmark 

## Wenxuan Liu ∗† 

## Zixuan Li ∗

## Bai Long ∗‡ 

State Key Laboratory of AI Safety, Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences Beijing, China liuwenxuan2024z@ict.ac.cn lizixuan@ict.ac.cn bailong@ict.ac.cn 

## Chunmao Zhang †

## Fenghui Zhang †

## Zhuo Chen †

## Wei Li 

State Key Laboratory of AI Safety, Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences Beijing, China 

## Yuxin Zuo †

## Fei Wang Bingbing Xu Xuhui Jiang 

State Key Laboratory of AI Safety, Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences Beijing, China 

## Jin Zhang †

## Xiaolong Jin †§Jiafeng Guo †

State Key Laboratory of AI Safety, Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences Beijing, China jinxiaolong@ict.ac.cn 

## Tat-Seng Chua 

National University of Singapore Singapore, Singapore 

## Xueqi Cheng †

State Key Laboratory of AI Safety, Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences Beijing, China 

Abstract 

Deep Research (DR) requires LLM agents to autonomously perform multi-step information seeking, processing, and reasoning to gen-erate comprehensive reports. In contrast to existing studies that mainly focus on unstructured web content, a more challenging DR task should additionally utilize structured knowledge to provide a solid data foundation, facilitate quantitative computation, and lead to in-depth analyses. In this paper, we refer to this novel task as Knowledgeable Deep Research (KDR), which requires DR agents to generate reports with both structured and unstructured knowledge. Furthermore, we propose the Hybrid Knowledge Analysis frame-work (HKA), a multi-agent architecture that reasons over both kinds of knowledge and integrates the texts, figures, and tables into co-herent multimodal reports. The key design is the Structured Knowl-edge Analyzer, which utilizes both coding and vision-language models to produce figures, tables, and corresponding insights. To support systematic evaluation, we construct KDR-Bench, which  

> ∗Contributed equally to this research.
> †Also with University of Chinese Academy of Sciences.
> ‡Also with National University of Singapore.
> §Xiaolong Jin is the corresponding author. Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
> Conference acronym ’XX, Woodstock, NY
> ©2018 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM. ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-XXXX-X/2018/06 https://doi.org/XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX

covers 9 domains, includes 41 expert-level questions, and incor-porates a large number of structured knowledge resources (e.g., 1,252 tables). We further annotate the main conclusions and key points for each question and propose three categories of evaluation metrics including general-purpose, knowledge-centric, and vision-enhanced ones. Experimental results demonstrate that HKA con-sistently outperforms most existing DR agents on general-purpose and knowledge-centric metrics, and even surpasses the Gemini DR agent on vision-enhanced metrics, highlighting its effective-ness in deep, structure-aware knowledge analysis. Finally, we hope this work can serve as a new foundation for structured knowledge analysis in DR agents and facilitate future multimodal DR studies. 

CCS Concepts 

• Information systems → Information retrieval .

Keywords 

Large Language Models, Deep Research 

ACM Reference Format: 

Wenxuan Liu, Zixuan Li, Bai Long, Chunmao Zhang, Fenghui Zhang, Zhuo Chen, Wei Li, Yuxin Zuo, Fei Wang, Bingbing Xu, Xuhui Jiang, Jin Zhang, Xiaolong Jin, Jiafeng Guo, Tat-Seng Chua, and Xueqi Cheng. 2018. Towards Knowledgeable Deep Research: Framework and Benchmark. In Proceedings of Make sure to enter the correct conference title from your rights confirmation email (Conference acronym ’XX). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 11 pages. https: //doi.org/XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX 

1 Introduction 

Recently, Large Language Model (LLM) agents have demonstrated remarkable capabilities across a variety of complex tasks, including  

> arXiv:2604.07720v1 [cs.AI] 9 Apr 2026 Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY Wenxuan Liu et al.

mathematics [ 20 ], software engineering [ 5 ], and scientific discov-ery [ 13 ]. Among these tasks, the Deep Research (DR) task has emerged as a critical area of focus due to its ability to facilitate so-phisticated, high-stakes applications. Compared to traditional infor-mation retrieval, the DR task requires LLM agents to autonomously perform multi-step information seeking, processing, and reasoning to generate comprehensive, evidence-grounded reports. However, existing DR agents either overly depend on web search [18 ] or adopt predefined tools to generate short-form responses [ 30 ], both of which fall short in flexibly reasoning over large-scale struc-tured knowledge (e.g. table and graphs) and make it challenging to conduct comprehensive research for answering questions such as “What factors account for the regional differences in the invest-ment of ESG worldwide in 2025?”. For such questions, structured knowledge is essential because it can provide a solid data foun-dation, facilitate quantitative computation, and lead to in-depth analyses. We refer to this challenging DR task as Knowledgeable Deep Research (KDR). To facilitate this task, we propose the Hybrid Knowledge Analy-sis framework (HKA), a multi-agent architecture that is able to rea-son over both structured and unstructured knowledge. Specifically, it consists of four LLM-based sub-agents, namely, Planner, Unstruc-tured Knowledge Analyzer, Structured Knowledge Analyzer, and Writer. Given a research question, the Planner first decomposes it into several subtasks and controls the workflow. For each subtask, the Planner iteratively generates tool calls to invoke either the Unstructured Knowledge Analyzer or the Structured Knowledge Analyzer. Subsequently, the Unstructured Knowledge Analyzer and the Structured Knowledge Analyzer generate supporting materials, including text, figures, and tables, via leveraging corresponding knowledge sources. Finally, the Writer aggregates the multimodal materials from all subtasks, resolves the conflicts among them, and produces a coherent and comprehensive report. In this framework, our key design is the Structured Knowledge Analyzer, which adopts a code model to generate code for producing multimodal materials and a vision-language model to generate corresponding insights. To support systematic evaluation, we construct KDR-Bench, a comprehensive benchmark that covers 9 domains, including Agri-culture, Politics & Economics, Energy & Environment, Finance & Insurance, Metals & Electronics, Society, Art, Technology, and Transportation. Using a human-in-the-loop strategy, we curate 41 expert-level research questions and aggregate a structured knowl-edge base of 1,252 tables. Furthermore, we annotate the main con-clusions and key points for each question. Based on these data and annotations, we develop three categories of evaluation metrics, in-cluding general-purpose, knowledge-centric, and vision-enhanced ones, which measure the ability of DR agents to utilize both un-structured and structured knowledge in an LLM-as-a-Judge setting. Finally, we evaluate 12 different baselines and HKA on the KDR-Bench. The baselines include LLMs with search tools, closed-source DR agents, and open-source DR agents. The experimental results show that HKA outperforms most baselines, including product-level DR agents. Since HKA is able to generate multimodal content, we further evaluate the generated reports using a multimodal large language model (MLLM) as the judge. The results show that HKA even outperforms the state-of-the-art DR agent, further validating its effectiveness. These findings also reveal the limitations of tra-ditional evaluation methods when applied to multimodal reports. We hope this work can serve as a new foundation for structured knowledge analysis in DR agents and facilitate future multimodal DR studies. The main contributions of this work are summarized as follows: 

• We introduce the KDR task, which challenges DR agents to reason over structured and unstructured knowledge and produce thorough research reports. 

• We propose HKA that integrates both structured and un-structured knowledge via a multi-agent framework to gen-erate comprehensive multimodal reports. With a Structured Knowledge Analyzer that is based on both coding and vision-language models, HKA can produce figures, tables, and cor-responding insights beyond text outputs. 

• We construct KDR-Bench, an expert-level benchmark across 9 domains, including 41 questions with extensive structured knowledge, along with an LLM-based evaluation framework for assessing knowledge utilization in each report. 

• Experimental results demonstrate that HKA outperforms most DR agents on general-purpose and knowledge-centric metrics, and even surpasses Gemini on vision-enhanced met-rics, highlighting its effectiveness in multimodal report gen-eration. 

2 Related Work 

Deep Research Agent. Deep Research agents aim to support in-depth investigation of user queries through large-scale information retrieval, organization, and long-form writing [ 27 , 38 ]. This par-adigm has gained significant traction in industrial applications, such as Gemini [ 12 ] and Perplexity [ 1 ], where these capabilities are regarded as a hallmark of advanced agentic reasoning and tool proficiency [ 41 ]. In parallel, the open-source community strives to narrow the gap with proprietary models. Existing efforts gener-ally fall into two categories: constructing robust multi-agent work-flows to emulate closed-source systems [ 6 , 15 , 16 ], or employing agentic reinforcement learning [ 8 , 36 , 40 ] to train LLMs to master complex tool usage like information seeking and long-form writ-ing [ 17 , 18 , 30 , 42 ]. Nevertheless, most existing deep research agents primarily operate over unstructured web resources, with limited support for computation and reasoning over structured knowledge. 

Deep Research Benchmarks. Deep Research benchmarks are gen-erally categorized into two types: complex problem-solving and long-form report generation. Representative benchmarks for problem-solving include Humanity’s Last Exam (HLE) [ 24 ] and Browser-Comp [ 6, 35 , 43 ], which primarily evaluate capabilities in multi-step reasoning and information seeking. For report generation tasks, prominent benchmarks include DeepResearch Bench [ 10 ] and Per-sonal DR [ 19 ]. However, the questions in the report-oriented bench-marks typically prioritize textual information aggregation, which falls short of providing a fine-grained evaluation of an agent’s abil-ity to use knowledge for quantitative analysis and the derivation of novel conclusions. KDR-Bench is designed to evaluate the capability of knowledge analysis in DR agents. Towards Knowledgeable Deep Research: Framework and Benchmark Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY Structured Knowledge Analyzer 

Unstructured Knowledge Analyzer 

Planner 

Subtask 1 

Subtask 2 

…

Writer 

Subtask 1 Result 

... 

Subtask k 

… U.K.A. Query 

…

S.K.A. Query 

Decompose the given 

research question into 

clear, ordered 

subtasks to enable 

systematic planning 

and execution …

Select the appropriate 

analysis tool for the 

current subtask and 

generate a precise, 

task-specific query …

Intent: The user aims to further examine the 

historical context shaping the issue by 

analyzing the underlying political system, 

levels of party polarization, the significance of 

narrow state-level margins…….    

> ## The Electoral College and the Geographic
> Distribution
> The design of the Electoral College has played a
> key role in ... However, this may lead to
> mismatch situations where the president wins the
> Electoral College but loses the Popular Vote such
> as 2000.and 2016. The figure 1 introduces the
> mismatch situation detailedly...
> [Mismatch in U.S Election ] ![./Fig_1.png]
> ……
> Due to the expansion of voting rights, there are
> obvious conflicts between races, geographic
> distribution. For example ,the racial realignment
> has deepened since ……[1]
> Reference ：
> [1] The 15th Amendment (1870)
> …

Useful Documents: 

Doc1: The 15th Amendment (1870) — This 

amendment to the United States Constitution 

prohibits … 

Doc2: Voter Suppression in the 20th Century ... 

Query Search Engine 

Instruction Instruction 

Subtask Generation Query Generation 

U.K.A. Query 

S.K.A . Query 

Knowledge Retrieval Code Generation Code Execution Result Analysis 

S.K.A. 

Query 

Vector Retrieval 

Select the most 

relevant and 

informative table from 

all retrieved tables 

based on the S.K.A 

query. 

Rerank Instruction 

Generate executable 

Python code that 

strictly follows the 

provided data schema .

Data Schema:           

> #1. Data Structure:
> #number_of_votes= List[Dict]
> #Key: year (int),
> #Value: total_votes (float)

Code Instruction 

…

Structured 

KBs 

Insight: The Electoral College 

amplifies state-level wins into 

disproportionate national 

victories, however, it may be 

inconsistent at some specific years 

such as 2000 and 2016 when the 

elected presidents lost the… 

Intent Generation Web Search Result Summarization 

> Doc1 : The 15th Amendment (1870)
> The Fifteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution prohibited
> federal and state governments from denying citizens the right
> to vote based on race, color, or previous condition …

Analyze search results to 

summarize results based on the 

U.K.A. query and intent .

Summarization Instruction               

> def knowledge_computing (data ):
> …
> #1. Plot Main Trends
> ax .plot( years ,
> electoral_shares ,label ='Electoral
> College Share' )
> ax .plot( years ,popular_shares ,
> label ='Popular Vote Share' )
> #2. Filter Anomalies
> mismatch_years =
> get_mismatch_years (data )…

Subtask Writing 

Please generate the 

current subtask result 

based on the following 

multimodal materials .

Multimodal Materials: 

Useful Figures: 

Figure 1: Figures about 

mismatch[figure1.png](The 

figure explores the 

mismatch in Election.) 

Useful Docs: 

Doc 1: The 15th Amendment 

(1870) 

Writing Instruction 

Subtask 2 Result 

Subtask 3 Result 

Final Report 

Compose final 

report by 

coherently 

integrating all 

preceding results .

Report Instruction 

Identify and summarize the 

search intent reflected by the 

U.K.A. query .

Intent Instruction 

Final Refinement 

Please carefully 

examine the figure and 

derive novel insights 

by summarizing the key 

patterns, trends which 

are revealed in the 

data. 

Analysis Instruction 

> Doc2 : Voter Suppression in the 20th Century
> This document examines systematic voter suppression
> practices during the twentieth century, including literacy tests,
> poll taxes, intimidation, and legal barriers disproportionately
> targeting African American and minority voters.
> Doc3 : The Voting Rights Act of 1965
> This document analyzes the passage and impact of the Voting
> Rights Act of 1965, which aimed to enforce the Fifteenth
> Amendment by eliminating discriminatory voting practices
> Doc4 : Contemporary Voting Restrictions in the 21st
> Century
> This document explores recent developments in voting
> regulations in the twenty-first century, including voter iden

From the perspectives of institutional rules and changes in the electorate, please analyze how these factors have historically influenced the frequency of mismatches between the popular 

vote and the Electoral College in U.S. 

Executing Code             

> [INFO] Loading data...
> [INFO] Generating plot
> configuration...
> [INFO] Drawing figure ...
> [INFO] ...
> [INFO] Saving figure to
> output/figure1.png
> [INFO] Successful
> Execution.

Figure 1: Demonstration of the proposed HKA framework. 

3 Hybrid Knowledge Analysis Framework 3.1 Problem Formulation 

Given a research question 𝑞 , the Knowledgeable Deep Research (KDR) task requires an LLM agent to generate a long-form, multi-modal output 𝑦 (i.e., a report) based on multi-step reasoning over both structured knowledge sources S and unstructured knowl-edge sources U. The total reasoning trajectory is denoted as R =

(𝑟 1, ..., 𝑟 𝑖 , ..., 𝑟 𝑇 ). Each reasoning step 𝑟 𝑖 autonomously invokes tools from an available tool set T related to the above two kinds of knowl-edge sources. The overall process is formalized by the following conditional probability, 

𝑃 (𝑦 | 𝑞, S, U) =

𝑇 Ö

𝑖 =1

𝑃 (𝑟 𝑖 | 𝑟 <𝑖 , 𝑞, T , {O 𝜏 }𝜏 <𝑖 ), (1) where {O 𝜏 }𝜏 <𝑖 denotes the outputs of all tool calls before step 

𝑖 . 𝑟 <𝑖 represents the reasoning steps generated before position 𝑖 .Unlike traditional DR tasks that primarily focus on unstructured knowledge sources (e.g., web pages), the KDR task requires agents to additionally utilize structured knowledge sources S, such as tables, beyond web pages. 

3.2 Overview of HKA 

Existing deep research frameworks [ 18 , 25 ] typically do not distin-guish between different types of knowledge and can only perform shallow analysis over structured knowledge sources. Therefore, they lack the capability to efficiently process large-scale structured data, perform complex computation, and further obtain novel in-sights effectively. To address these limitations, we propose HKA, a multi-agent framework that leverages structured knowledge to pro-vide a solid data foundation, facilitate quantitative computation, and enable in-depth analyses. In addition, HKA integrates unstructured knowledge sources to produce comprehensive research reports. As shown in Figure 1, HKA consists of four sub-agents: 1) the Planner, which designs subtasks, invokes the following three sub-agents, and controls the workflow; 2) the Structured Knowledge Analyzer, which computes over structured knowledge via a code LLM and a VLM; 3) the Unstructured Knowledge Analyzer, which retrieves and summarizes unstructured knowledge sources; and 4) the Writer, which integrates the supporting materials from the two analyzers into subtask results and composes the final report. 

3.3 Planner 

Given a research question 𝑞 , the Planner automatically performs task planning and dynamically invokes other agents to collabora-tively complete the report generation process. Specifically, the Plan-ner first decomposes the question into a sequence of fine-grained subtasks. Then, for each subtask, the Planner autonomously decides which type of knowledge source is currently required, and gener-ates a tool call to invoke the corresponding knowledge analyzer. For the Unstructured Knowledge Analyzer (U.K.A.), the Planner generates a U.K.A. query as input and passes the historical state as context. For the Structured Knowledge Analyzer (S.K.A.), the Planner generates an S.K.A. query and similarly provides the his-torical state. After the Planner gathers the supporting materials via iterative tool calls, it invokes the Writer to organize these materials and write a coherent subtask result corresponding to that subtask. Finally, after all subtasks are completed, the Planner invokes the Writer to refine the overall report based on all subtask results. 

3.4 Unstructured Knowledge Analyzer 

The Unstructured Knowledge Analyzer is designed to search and integrate unstructured knowledge into supporting materials based on the U.K.A. query from the Planner. Following Prabhakar et al .[25] , in this paper, we primarily focus on web content retrieved via search engines. Specifically, the Unstructured Knowledge Analyzer Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY Wenxuan Liu et al. 

consists of three main steps, namely, Intent Generation, Web Search, and Result Summarization. 

Intent Generation. Since the U.K.A. queries generated by the Planner are usually short and lack specific details, it is difficult to obtain precise information from massive web pages with only these queries. Therefore, we prompt the LLM to expand each U.K.A. query into a detailed search intent based on the current subtask [ 14 , 18 ], so that we can extract relevant information from web pages. 

Web Search. Based on the U.K.A. query and generated search in-tent, this sub-agent retrieves web pages through an existing search engine. Then, the sub-agent converts the web pages into Markdown, an LLM-friendly format. 

Result Summarization. Finally, the sub-agent summarizes rele-vant information, including key data, descriptions, and conclusions, from the retrieved Markdown-formatted web pages according to the subtask, the U.K.A. query, and the search intent. To save the context length for the Planner, only the summarized information is visible to the Planner, whereas the original web pages are chunked and stored for the Writer. 

3.5 Structured Knowledge Analyzer 

Given the S.K.A. query and the historical state from the Planner, the Structured Knowledge Analyzer aims to retrieve structured knowledge relevant to the query, perform quantitative computa-tion, and produce multimodal analysis results with corresponding insights. Since the table is a typical form of structured knowledge, we use it as an example to describe how this sub-agent works. This sub-agent consists of four main steps, namely, Knowledge Retrieval, Code Generation, Code Execution, and Result Analysis. 

Knowledge Retrieval. To obtain the structured knowledge rele-vant to the current subtask, the sub-agent first uses the S.K.A. query to retrieve tables based on their descriptions (including titles and summaries). Specifically, we adopt a retrieve-and-rerank pipeline for this step, where a dense retriever recalls the top-𝑘 tables ac-cording to the similarity scores between the query and the table descriptions. Then, an LLM re-ranks the retrieved tables to select the most relevant table. To avoid redundant analysis of the same table, we filter out previously used tables during retrieval. 

Code Generation and Execution. To conduct flexible computa-tion over the retrieved table, we adopt a code LLM to generate and execute customized computation code for different questions and subtasks. Instead of appending all data in the table to the prompt, we summarize the schema of each table in the form of comments and convert the table into a list of corresponding objects (e.g., “real_gdp_growth_of_canada = [...]”). In the Code Generation step, only the comments are given in the prompt, while the specific objects are invisible. In the Code Execution step, the objects are injected before the computation code. Through such a strategy, the code LLM can understand how to access the objects with much fewer tokens compared to directly injecting the entire table into the prompt. In addition, we observe that the generated code some-times fails to execute. Thus, we adopt a retry mechanism in the Code Execution step. If the code fails to run successfully, the error messages will also be attached to regenerate the computation code, unless a predefined maximum number of retries is reached. As a result, the execution failure rate decreases from 31.7% to 0.51%. 

Result Analysis. Since the Code Execution step may produce fig-ures or tables, we adopt a vision-language model (VLM) to analyze these results and derive corresponding insights. The Writer will use the figures and tables in the report, and generate textual analysis based on the insights. In practice, we found that the Code Execu-tion results are sometimes empty, or include visually incorrect or question-irrelevant outputs. Therefore, we also adopt a retry mech-anism in this step. Specifically, the VLM first determines whether the sub-agent should regenerate the computation code using the code model. Once the generated figures pass VLM-based validation and the corresponding conclusions are produced, the validated ma-terials are forwarded to the Planner. As a result, the failure rate decreases from 55.5% to 1.7%. 

3.6 Writer 

The Writer aims to organize the supporting materials produced by the Unstructured and Structured Knowledge Analyzers into a coherent and comprehensive report. Considering the limited con-text length, we divide the writing process into two steps, namely, Subtask Writing and Final Refinement. 

Subtask Writing. When each subtask is completed, the Writer immediately integrates the supporting materials for this subtask, resolves the conflicts among them, and writes a subtask result. In practice, although we emphasize the importance of multimodal materials in the prompt, the Writer still tends to exclude them from the output, partly due to the dominance of textual information from web sources. Therefore, we first generate an outline which retains most multimodal materials, and then fill in the textual content to produce the subtask result. 

Final Refinement. When all subtasks are completed, the Writer composes all the subtask results to form a complete and coherent report. Considering that simply combining the results from prede-fined subtasks may not produce a high-quality report, the Writer is required to adjust the report structure based on these results, remove redundancies, resolve logical inconsistencies, and finally generate a well-structured, comprehensive, and coherent report. 

4 KDR-Bench 

The proposed KDR-Bench includes two parts, a comprehensively annotated dataset and a corresponding evaluation framework. To efficiently obtain an expert-level dataset, we introduce a human-in-the-loop data construction process, which incorporates an LLM with human review and revision. To emphasize the knowledge utilization during evaluation, we introduce a knowledge-enhanced evaluation framework, which extends existing general-purpose metrics with our newly proposed knowledge-centric and vision-enhanced metrics. 

4.1 Dataset Construction 

As shown in Figure 2, the dataset construction process consists of three main steps, namely, Data Collection, Question Genera-tion, and Knowledge Point Annotation. In what follows, we will introduce these three steps in more detail. Towards Knowledgeable Deep Research: Framework and Benchmark Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY 1. Structured Knowledge Collection 2. Research Question Generation 3. Knowledge Point Annotation                   

> Structured KBs
> Domain
> Sub Domain
> Agriculture Politics …
> Election Internation
> Topic Election in U.S …
> Domain ：Politics
> Sub Domain ：Election
> Topic ：Election in U.S
> Abstract ：The US presidential election is a ……
> Structured Knowledge ：
> Search & Collect Domain: Politics,
> Sub domain: Election
> Topic: Election in U.S
> Structured Knowledge:
> 1. Voting populations
> since 1824.xlsx
> 2. …
> Statistical Question
> Predictive Question
> Comprehensive Ques.

....          

> Question Templates
> Question: From the perspectives of institutional rules and
> changes in the electorate , please analyze how these factors
> have historically influence the frequency of mismatches
> between the popular vote and the electoral college .
> Reference Table: 1, 2, 3, 5, 9, ...
> Question Type: comprehensive analysis
> Main Conclusion
> Annotation
> Main Conclusion:
> Institutional rules,
> particularly the winner -
> take -all allocation of
> Electoral College votes
> and the fixed
> apportionment of …
> Key Points
> Annotation
> Table 1 Sub Conclusion:
> Electoral College
> outcomes can diverge
> sharply from popular...
> Table 2 Sub Conclusion:
> ...

General -Purpose Metrics: 

Knowledge -Centric Metrics 

Vision -Enhanced Metrics 

Judge LLM 

Judge LLM 

Judge LLM 

Judge MLLM            

> Question :From the perspectives of institutional rules
> and changes in the electorate, please analyze how
> these factors have historically influence the …
> Election in U.S Banking in EU Art market worldwide
> …
> 1. Voting populations since 1824.xlsx
> 2. Voter turnout rates.xlsx
> …
> Structured KB
> Task Instructions
> 1 . Generate in -depth research questions based on the
> tables. ..
> 2. Specify which tables support each question. ..
> 3. Provide the reasoning used to derive the questions. ..
> 4. According to different {} templates, generate
> corresponding analysis question .

Manual Quality Check    

> Task Instructions
> Generate the main conclusion/key points for the current
> question, based on the above information including abstract,
> Reference tables.
> Reference
> Report
> (Main Conclusion Alignment)
> (Key points Coverage)

Judge LLM        

> (Supportiveness)
> Report
> Main Conclusion
> Report A
> Report B
> Report A
> Report B
> Score : 3/7, 3 points
> covered in report and
> supported by table.
> Score : 5/7, 5 points
> covered in report.
> Score: 8, Report aligns
> with conclusion well.
> Key points
> Report:
> Comp: 7, Read: 9
> Coher : 8, Depth:7
> Reference:
> Comp: 8, Read: 8
> Coher : 9, Depth:9
> Taxonomy
> Domain ：Politics
> Sub Domain ：Election
> Topic ：Election in U.S
> Abstract ：The US presidential election is a ……
> Structured KB
> Structured KB
> Instruction Instruction

(a) (b) 

Figure 2: The construction procedure of KDR-Bench: (a) Dataset construction process; (b) Evaluation framework. 16.4% 

> 15.5%
> 15.0%
> 14.1%
> 11.7%
> 11.5%
> 7.1%
> 6.0% 2.7%

(a) Domain Distribution 

205 

194 

188 

176 

147 

144 

89 

75 

34 

(b) Table Counts by Domain 

> Agr.
> Soc.
> E & P
> F & I
> E & E
> M & E
> Art
> Tech.
> Trans.

Figure 3: The statistics on tables in KDR-Bench. 

4.1.1 Structured Knowledge Collection. We collect the structured knowledge from an online data analytics platform 1. As illustrated in Figure 2, the data are organized via a three-level hierarchy, namely, domain, sub-domain, and topic. Each topic is associated with an abstract which describes key concepts about the topic and a set of tables which summarize key indicators based on expert knowledge. Since the table contents are not publicly accessible on the platform, we manually retrieve the corresponding data sources via search engines. Further, we adopt a code model (Qwen3-Coder [ 39 ]) to generate the processing code that converts table data into Python objects, such as dictionaries or lists, accompanied by a comment-style schema description specifying field names. Finally, we obtain 9 domains, 18 sub-domains, 41 topics, accompanied by 1,252 tables. The domains include Agriculture (Agr.), Politics & Economics (P&E), Energy & Environment (E&E), Finance & Insurance (F&I), Metals & Electronics (M&E), Society (Soc.), Art, Technology (Tech.), and Transportation (Trans.). The number and distribution of tables in each domain are shown in Figure 3. 

4.1.2 Research Question Generation. We create the research ques-tions based on the collected data. To avoid overly long contexts, we replace raw table contents in prompts with LLM-generated table summaries that describe key data characteristics and trends. To pro-mote diversity in question types, we generate candidate questions from six distinct templates, each targeting a different analytical 

1https://www.statista.com. The website restricts commercial use of its data. All data collected in this work are publicly available. 

behavior, including Comprehensive (holistic synthesis of theory, methods, and evidence), Predictive (forecasting future trends based on historical patterns), Categorization (systematic classification and typology construction), Statistical (quantitative relationship and pattern analysis), Attributive (causal mechanism and factor attribution analysis), and Comparative (comparison across enti-ties, contexts, or time periods). Then, a human expert reviews the candidate questions and selects the most suitable one as the final question. Finally, we further refine the questions and obtain 41 high-quality questions in total. In addition, we observe that the generated questions are often vague, leading to unclear analytical scopes. To enhance the qual-ity of the questions, we instruct the LLM with detailed guidelines, including specific temporal scopes (e.g., “from 2010 to 2020”), ge-ographic boundaries (e.g., “the U.S. and China”), and analytical perspectives (e.g., “from the perspectives of institutional rules and changes in the electorate”). 

4.1.3 Knowledge Point Annotation. To evaluate the knowledge uti-lization of the DR agents, we further annotate each question with a main conclusion and a set of key points. The main conclusion provides a high-level response to the question, which is generated based on the question, topic abstract, and corresponding table sum-maries. Each key point describes the detailed analysis grounded in a specific table, which is generated based on the main conclusion and the corresponding table. Both main conclusions and key points are reviewed by human experts in terms of professionalism, factuality, and analytical depth. In total, we obtain 41 main conclusions and 261 key points. 

4.2 Evaluation Framework 

Existing evaluation methods focus on the general-purpose met-rics such as comprehensiveness or readability. However, they fall short in justifying whether the DR agents utilize the appropriate knowledge and derive reasonable conclusions. Although some stud-ies [ 10 , 34 ] have investigated the trustworthiness of unstructured knowledge sources, the evaluation of structured knowledge utiliza-tion in DR remains largely unexplored. To systematically evaluate Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY Wenxuan Liu et al. 

the DR agents on the proposed dataset, we propose a knowledge-enhanced evaluation framework, which consists of three categories of metrics, namely, general-purpose metrics, knowledge-centric metrics, and vision-enhanced metrics. 

4.2.1 General-Purpose Metrics. Following the existing studies [ 10 ], we adopt RACE to evaluate multiple dimensions of a generated report against a reference report. Each dimension consists of a set of detailed evaluation criteria with different criterion weights. The criterion-level score of a criterion 𝑐 is calculated via comparing the generated report 𝑦 𝑔𝑒𝑛 with the reference report 𝑦 𝑟𝑒 𝑓 using an LLM as the judge: 

(𝑠 𝑦 𝑔𝑒𝑛 ,𝑐 , 𝑠 𝑦 𝑟𝑒 𝑓 ,𝑐 ) = J𝐺 (𝑦 𝑔𝑒𝑛 , 𝑦 𝑟𝑒 𝑓 , 𝑐 ), (2) where J𝐺 (·) is the judge function that assigns scores for the gener-ated and reference reports, respectively, according to the criterion. Then, the dimension score of dimension 𝑑 is the weighted sum of all its criteria scores. Similarly, the report intermediate score 𝑠 𝑦,𝐼𝑛𝑡 

is the weighted sum of all its dimension scores. Finally, the overall score of the generated report 𝑠 𝑦 𝑔𝑒𝑛 is calculated as follows: 

𝑠 𝑦 𝑔𝑒𝑛 = 𝑠 𝑦 𝑔𝑒𝑛 ,𝐼𝑛𝑡 

𝑠 𝑦 𝑔𝑒𝑛 ,𝐼𝑛𝑡 + 𝑠 𝑦 𝑟𝑒 𝑓 ,𝐼𝑛𝑡 

. (3) Following the convention, we report both the overall average score and the per-dimension scores. In particular, we replace the original “Instruction-Following” dimension with “Coherence” (Coher.) to focus on the overall logical consistency of the reports, and then re-generate the criteria for this dimension. We retain the other dimen-sions, namely, Comprehensiveness (Comp.), Depth, and Readability (Read.). Since we have modified the dimensions, we assign equal weights to each dimension to avoid regenerating all weights. 

4.2.2 Knowledge-Centric Metrics. Based on the main conclusions and key points, we propose three metrics, namely, main conclusion alignment, key point coverage, and key point supportiveness. Main conclusion alignment (Main.) measures how well the gen-erated report aligns with the main conclusion. We utilize an LLM as the judge to score the generated report on a 0-10 scale: 

𝑠 𝑀𝑎𝑖𝑛 = J(1) 

> 𝐾

(𝑦 𝑔𝑒𝑛 , 𝑀, 𝑞 ), (4) where 𝑀 denotes the main conclusion; 𝑞 is the question; J𝑀 𝐾 (·) is the judge function. The overall score is calculated by averaging the scores across all the reports. To capture more fine-grained differences between agents, we multiply the overall score by 10 to rescale it to the range of 0-100. Although the main conclusion is generated via the question, abstract, and corresponding tables, it is not strongly bound to the tables. Therefore, an agent can still obtain a high score even if it only utilizes unstructured knowledge. Key point coverage (Key.) measures how well the generated report covers each key point. Given the key point list 𝑃 , we utilize the LLM to judge whether each key point is covered in the report: 

𝑠 𝑘𝑒𝑦 =

Í J(2) 

> 𝐾

(𝑦 𝑔𝑒𝑛 , 𝑃, 𝑞 )|𝑃 | , (5) where J(2) 

> 𝐾

(·) is the judge function returning a list of binary indica-tors, with 1 indicating that the key point is covered and 0 otherwise. Since the key points are generated directly via the corresponding table, this metric is more related to structured knowledge utiliza-tion. However, a DR agent can still cover some of the key points via utilizing the unstructured knowledge. Based on the above metrics, we further introduce the key point supportiveness score (Support.), which considers not only the cov-erage, but also whether the corresponding tables are retrieved and analyzed. This metric measures whether the agent derives correct key points by leveraging the appropriate tables. Formally, it is cal-culated as follows: 

𝑠 𝑠𝑢𝑝 =

Í J(2) 

> 𝐾

(𝑦 𝑔𝑒𝑛 , 𝑃, 𝑞 ) Ó J(3) 

> 𝐾

(𝑦 𝑔𝑒𝑛 ,𝑇 , 𝑞 )|𝑃 | , (6) where 𝑇 is the set of ground-truth tables associated with question 𝑞 ;

J(3) 

> 𝐾

(·) is the judge function that returns a list of binary indicators specifying whether the table corresponding to each key point is utilized in the report (1 for used and 0 otherwise); and Ó is the element-wise conjunction operation. Since this metric requires retrieving the tables, it mainly reflects the ability of an agent to utilize structured knowledge. 

4.2.3 Vision-enhanced Metrics. In existing approaches, the gener-ated reports are represented in markdown format and evaluated via a text-based LLM. Under this setting, the figures are represented as insertion markers. Thus, the LLM fails to actually understand the content of the figures. Therefore, we compile the reports into PDFs and utilize a multimodal LLM (MLLM) as the judge to take the visual features, such as report layout and figure content, into consideration. Specifically, considering the cost and efficiency, we adopt pairwise comparison, where an agent pair (𝐴, 𝐵 ) is compared to calculate the win rate 𝑆 𝑉 (𝐴, 𝐵 ) using an MLLM judge as follows: 

𝑆 𝑉 (𝐴, 𝐵 ) =

Í𝑁 𝑖 =1 J𝑉 (𝑦 𝑖,𝐴 , 𝑦 𝑖,𝐵 )

𝑁 , (7) where 𝑁 is the number of questions; 𝑦 𝑖,𝑋 is the report generated by agent 𝑋 ∈ { 𝐴, 𝐵 } for the 𝑖 -th question; the indicator function 

J𝑉 (·) outputs 1 if the judge prefers 𝑦 𝑖,𝐴 over 𝑦 𝑖,𝐵 , and 0 otherwise. We report both the overall win rate and per-domain win rates. 

5 Experiments 

We conduct experiments on KDR-Bench and compare HKA with several baseline methods, including LLMs with search tools and deep research agents, to address the following research questions: 

RQ1. How does HKA compare with existing DR agents across the three metric categories? 

RQ2. How do the key sub-agents and key steps contribute to HKA? 

RQ3. How reliable is the proposed evaluation framework? 

RQ4. How does HKA generate multimodal content step by step? 

5.1 Experimental Setup 

5.1.1 Baselines. We evaluate three categories of systems, including LLMs with search tools, closed-source DR agents, and open-source DR agents. With respect to LLMs with search tools, we select Hun-yuan2.0 [ 31 ], GLM4.6 [ 29 ], Qwen3-Max [ 3], and Minimax-M2 [ 21 ]. With respect to closed-source DR agents, we select OpenAI Deep Research (OpenAI) [ 23 ], Grok-4 DeeperSearch (Grok) [ 37 ], Per-plexity Deep Research (Perplexity) [ 1], and Gemini-3-Pro Deep Towards Knowledgeable Deep Research: Framework and Benchmark Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY 

Table 1: Results on General-purpose and Knowledge-centric metrics. The best results are in boldface, and the second-best results are underlined. 

General-Purpose Knowledge-Centric Methods Avg. Comp. Depth Coher. Read. Main. Key. Support. 

LLM with search tools 

Hunyuan2.0 40.6 40.9 38.8 41.4 41.2 61.0 46.7 -GLM4.6 40.8 40.8 36.4 42.6 43.5 59.1 40.1 -Qwen3-Max 44.6 43.9 40.5 46.6 47.4 64.2 43.5 -Minimax-M2 44.7 44.8 41.1 46.8 46.0 58.2 50.5 -

Closed-source DR Agents 

OpenAI 41.3 41.4 38.0 43.1 42.7 63.5 44.1 -Perplexity 46.5 47.2 44.8 47.5 46.3 70.1 49.8 -Grok 44.5 44.5 42.3 45.4 45.7 76.5 49.5 -Gemini 50.2 48.3 52.8 48.5 51.0 82.6 58.3 -

Open-source DR Agents 

Tongyi 41.8 42.2 39.2 43.6 42.2 58.6 41.2 -Enterprise 46.0 46.9 43.5 46.8 46.8 72.3 51.8 -LangChain (Web) 44.4 48.5 39.4 47.2 42.5 63.7 52.1 -LangChain (Table) 44.9 45.5 41.9 45.9 46.2 60.3 54.9 20.4 LangChain (Hybrid) 44.8 47.4 40.2 46.6 44.8 62.3 53.6 21.2 ThinkDepth (Web) 46.1 46.6 42.8 47.1 47.8 71.7 51.8 -ThinkDepth (Table) 46.1 46.5 43.2 47.0 47.6 67.9 53.2 20.1 ThinkDepth (Hybrid) 46.3 47.1 42.7 47.6 47.8 68.3 53.6 18.3 

HKA 48.4 48.6 48.8 47.7 48.5 82.1 61.7 27.8 

Research (Gemini) [ 12 ]. The above systems are configured to use their default search sources. With respect to open-source DR agents, we select Tongyi-Deepresearch-30B-A3B (Tongyi) [ 30 ], Enterprise Deep Research (Enterprise) [ 25 ], LangChain Open Deep Research (LangChain) [ 16 ], and ThinkDepthAI Deep Research (ThinkDepth) [ 32 ]. Further, we modify LangChain and ThinkDepth to support three search settings: (1) Web Search, which only searches for web pages; (2) Table Search, which only searches for tables in KDR-Bench; and (3) Hybrid Search, which searches for both. In the latter two set-tings, tables are treated as text and integrated into prompts, similar to web pages. 

5.1.2 Implementation Details. HKA is implemented via the Lang-Graph framework 2. We use Qwen3-235B-A22B-Instruct-2507 [ 39 ]as the backbone LLM of the Planner and the Writer. For Structured Knowledge Analyzer, we use Qwen3-Coder-480B-A35B-Instruct [ 39 ]as the code LLM, Qwen3-VL-235B-A22B-Instruct-2507 [ 4] as the vision-language model, text-embedding-3-small [ 22 ] as the embed-ding model and FAISS [ 9] as the vector store. For Unstructured Knowledge Analyzer, we use Serper [ 26 ] as the web search tool, Crawl4AI [ 33 ] as the crawler tool, and Qwen3-235B-A22B-Instruct-2507 as the backbone LLM. For a fair comparison, the open-source DR agents (except Tongyi) are also configured with the same back-bone LLM and the same search tool. With respect to the KDR-Bench, we use Gemini-2.5-Flash [ 11 ]in the Data Collection step to generate table summaries. In the following two steps, we use Gemini-3-Pro [ 12 ] to generate questions 

> 2https://github.com/langchain-ai/langgraph

and annotate knowledge points. To avoid potential bias, for general-purpose and knowledge-centric metrics, we use DeepSeek-V3.2 [ 7]as the judge LLM; for vision-enhanced metrics, we use GPT-5 [ 28 ]as the judge MLLM. 

5.2 Performance Comparison (RQ1) 

We compare HKA with aforementioned baselines across three met-ric categories. For general-purpose and knowledge-centric metrics, we evaluate all baselines. For vision-enhanced metrics, due to space limitations, we select 9 baselines. The results are shown in Table 1 and Table 2. 

5.2.1 Results on General-Purpose Metrics. The results on general-purpose metrics are shown in the left part of Table 1. From these results, we have the following observations: (1) HKA outperforms the baselines except Gemini, showing its effectiveness in utilizing both structured and unstructured knowl-edge to generate high-quality reports. Notably, HKA outperforms LangChain and ThinkDepth by more than 2.1 points in average score, despite utilizing the same backbone LLM, which highlights the superiority of HKA. Although HKA outperforms most closed-source DR agents, it still falls short of the best-performing DR agent, Gemini. We suppose that the performance gap is largely due to the differences in the backbone LLM capabilities. (2) Generally, Deep Research agents outperform LLMs with search tools, suggesting that multi-step reasoning enables more effective information integration and supports higher-quality re-port generation. Another interesting finding is that open-source DR agents show comparable performance to closed-source ones, Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY Wenxuan Liu et al. 

except Gemini. However, HKA outperforms both open-source and closed-source DR agents (except Gemini) significantly, which im-plies that enhancing the structured knowledge analysis capability is an effective way to break through the current bottleneck in DR, besides improving the backbone LLMs. (3) DR agents with table search usually obtain higher Depth scores than those with web search, supporting our hypothesis that structured knowledge facilitates deeper analysis. However, agents with hybrid search do not show significant improvements over those using web search or table search, suggesting that a shallow integration of unstructured and structured knowledge is insufficient. In contrast, HKA more effectively utilizes both kinds of knowledge and achieves a higher average score. 

5.2.2 Results on Knowledge-Centric Metrics. The results on knowledge-centric metrics are shown in the right part of Table 1. From these results, we have the following observations: (1) HKA outperforms the baselines, except Gemini, by more than 5.6 points in Main Conclusion Alignment, demonstrating its effec-tiveness in producing high-level conclusions for report generation. In contrast, although HKA underperforms Gemini, the gap is mar-ginal, indicating that HKA achieves similar performance to the best-performing DR agent. This is because the main conclusion integrates unstructured and structured knowledge, as mentioned in Section 4.2.2. Gemini can obtain a high Main Conclusion Alignment score even though it relies primarily on unstructured knowledge sources. Another supporting evidence is that LangChain (Table) and ThinkDepth (Table) exhibit lower Main Conclusion Alignment scores than LangChain (Web) and ThinkDepth (Web), respectively. (2) HKA outperforms all the baselines, including Gemini, by more than 3.4 points in Key Point Coverage, demonstrating its ef-fectiveness in analyzing structured knowledge. As described in Sec-tion 4.2.2, Key Point Coverage emphasizes measuring the structured knowledge utilization of DR agents. Therefore, HKA obtains the best Key Point Coverage score via using code to analyze structured knowledge in-depth and using a vision-language model to produce insights about it. Similarly, LangChain and ThinkDepth with table and hybrid search, both of which utilize structured knowledge, also demonstrate higher scores than their web search counterparts. (3) HKA outperforms all the baselines by more than 6.6 points in Key Point Supportiveness. This is because HKA separately analyzes structured and unstructured knowledge, and then composes the re-sults via the Writer, which reduces mutual interference between the two knowledge sources. In contrast, agents with hybrid search (i.e., shallow integration of structured and unstructured knowledge) do not yield significant gains over their table-search counterparts and may even hinder structured knowledge utilization in ThinkDepth. 

5.2.3 Results on Vision-Enhanced Metrics. As shown in Table 2, we calculate pairwise win rates between HKA and other baselines. In general, HKA outperforms all the baselines, including Gemini, in terms of win rates. The inconsistency between General-Purpose (50.2 for Gemini and 48.4 for HKA) and vision-enhanced results (56.1 for HKA vs. Gemini) highlights the importance of visual fea-tures, such as the layout and figure content. Notably, HKA not only generates figures from tables, but also cites external figure links extracted from web pages. On average, HKA generates 5.75 figures from tables and cites 0.98 figures from web pages. This suggests that the Structured Knowledge Analyzer significantly improves the visual presentation of the generated reports. On average, HKA shows the largest advantage in the Trans. domain and the least advantage in the F&I domain. To further investigate the reason for this phenomenon, we count the number of figures and tables in the generated reports. Results show that HKA generates 9.50 figures and tables per Trans. report, whereas Gemini only generates 2.00 per report. In contrast, HKA generates 9.67 figures and tables per F&I report, and Gemini generates 5.17 per report. We hypothesize this is because, in the F&I domain, web pages contain rich structured knowledge such as tables, which allows baselines to achieve better visual presentation by generating more tables. This limits the advantage HKA gains from its figure generation capability. 

5.3 Ablation Study (RQ2) 

To investigate the effectiveness of key sub-agents and key steps, we conduct an ablation study on HKA. We investigate four variants of HKA: (1) removing Unstructured Knowledge Analyzer, which is denoted as wo. U.K.A. ; (2) removing Structured Knowledge Ana-lyzer, which is denoted as wo. S.K.A. ; (3) removing the rerank step in knowledge retrieval and directly obtaining the most relevant table via vector similarity, which is denoted as wo. Rerank ; and (4) replacing the comment-style schema with comment-style table data, which is denoted as wo. Schema . We report three representative metrics, i.e., average score on general-purpose metrics (denoted as 

G.P. Avg. ), Main Conclusion Alignment, and Key Point Coverage. As shown in Table 3, when we remove either Unstructured Knowledge Analyzer or Structured Knowledge Analyzer, perfor-mance in all three metrics declines significantly. These results imply that both kinds of knowledge are essential for HKA to produce high-quality reports. When we remove the rerank step in knowledge retrieval, HKA also exhibits a performance drop, which implies that vector-based retrieval alone seems insufficient for selecting appropriate tables for different subtasks. Compared to above variants, replacing the comment-style schema with table data leads to only a slight performance drop. These re-sults suggest that the code LLM is able to organize raw data and perform appropriate computation over them. Notably, our schema-based approach becomes a more practical choice as the scale of table data increases, since the schema provides a precise and compact description of the data fields for operating on structured knowledge. 

5.4 Evaluation Reliability Study (RQ3) 

We analyze the reliability of the proposed evaluation framework from three aspects, namely, the judge model, the score consistency, and the human preference. We choose three representative metrics, namely, average score of General-Purpose metrics (G.P. Avg.), Main Conclusion Alignment (Main.), and Key Point Coverage (Key.). 

5.4.1 Judge Model Analysis. To examine whether different judge LLMs affect the evaluation results, we replace the default judge LLM (Default) with Claude-haiku-4.5-thinking (Claude) [ 2 ]. As shown in Table 4, the two judge LLMs derive relatively consistent rankings of the DR agents on G.P. Avg. and Main. With respect to Key., although the ranking of Minimax-M2 and Perplexity is opposite between the Towards Knowledgeable Deep Research: Framework and Benchmark Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY 

Table 2: Results on Vision-Enhanced metrics. Greener cells indicate a larger advantage for HKA, while redder cells indicate a larger disadvantage for HKA. 

Methods Agr. P&E E&E F&I M&E Soc. Art Tech. Trans. Avg. GLM4.6 91.7 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 83.3 100.0 100.0 97.6 Minimax-M2 100.0 80.0 100.0 83.3 100.0 83.3 100.0 100.0 100.0 92.2 Perplexity 66.7 91.7 60.0 66.7 70.0 83.3 66.7 50.0 100.0 72.0 Grok 66.7 100.0 100.0 58.3 80.0 83.3 66.7 100.0 100.0 81.7 Gemini 50.0 66.6 60.0 41.7 60.0 50.0 66.7 50.0 100.0 56.1 Enterprise 66.7 100.0 90.0 66.7 100.0 83.3 83.3 66.7 100.0 82.9 LangChain (Web) 75.0 100.0 80.0 75.0 100.0 83.3 100.0 50.0 100.0 84.1 LangChain (Table) 83.3 60.0 100.0 66.7 80.0 83.3 66.7 66.7 100.0 77.5 LangChain (Hybrid) 75.0 50.0 80.0 50.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 66.7 100.0 76.8 

Table 3: Results of ablation study. 

G.P. Avg. Main. Key. HKA 48.4 82.1 61.7 wo. S.K.A. 46.7 ↓1.7 74.1 ↓8.0 52.7 ↓9.0

wo. U.K.A. 45.4 ↓3.0 75.2 ↓6.9 58.7 ↓3.0

wo. Rerank 46.1 ↓2.3 79.3 ↓2.8 59.9 ↓1.9

wo. Schema 48.1 ↓0.3 81.7 ↓0.4 60.3 ↓1.4

Table 4: Results on different judge LLMs. 

Method Metric Default Claude Minimax-M2 G.P. Avg. 44.7 45.6 Main. 58.2 58.1 Key. 50.5 50.5 Perplexity G.P. Avg. 46.5 46.8 Main. 70.1 67.1 Key. 49.8 50.9 Enterprise G.P. Avg. 46.0 46.3 Main. 72.3 70.1 Key. 48.4 47.9 HKA G.P. Avg. 48.4 48.6 Main. 82.0 78.1 Key. 61.7 61.3 two judges, the absolute scores are similar, which demonstrates the stability of the evaluation. 

5.4.2 Score Consistency Analysis. To examine whether scores vary significantly across different generation runs, we generate reports in three independent runs and calculate the standard deviation (S.D.). Considering the time and financial costs, we exclude closed-source DR agents from this analysis. As shown in Table 5, among the three metrics, G.P. Avg. exhibits the highest stability (0.2 for Minimax-M2, Enterprise, and HKA). In contrast, Key. shows the largest S.D. (0.3 for Minimax-M2, 0.6 for Enterprise, and 0.5 for HKA), probably because it relates to fine-grained knowledge (tables) and is more easily affected by the randomness of the agents’ actions. 

Table 5: Results on different generation runs. 

Method Metric Run 1 Run 2 Run 3 S.D. Minimax-M2 G.P. Avg. 44.7 45.1 44.6 0.2 Main. 58.2 58.9 58.7 0.3 Key. 50.5 49.7 50.1 0.3 Enterprise G.P. Avg. 46.0 46.2 45.6 0.2 Main. 72.3 73.1 71.6 0.6 Key. 51.8 50.6 51.8 0.6 HKA G.P. Avg. 48.4 48.3 48.0 0.2 Main. 82.0 82.1 81.6 0.2 Key. 61.7 63.0 62.5 0.5 Nevertheless, the overall S.D. remains low ( ≤ 0.6), suggesting that these metrics are mostly consistent across runs. 

5.4.3 Human Preference Analysis. To examine whether the pro-posed evaluation framework aligns with human preferences, we randomly select 10 reports from HKA, Gemini, Grok, Perplexity, LangChain (Web), and LangChain (Table). Following the same eval-uation guidelines used by the MLLM judge, a human judge is asked to determine the relative quality of each given pair of reports. We pair HKA and Gemini with each of the other four agents, result-ing in 80 report pairs for comparison. The pairwise agreement rate (PAR) is calculated between the human preferences and the vision-enhanced results for these report pairs. The result is 86.3%, which shows a relatively high consistency between the proposed evaluation framework and human preferences. 

5.5 Case Study (RQ4) 

To further investigate the details of HKA, we conduct a case study on it. Figure 4 demonstrates part of the research trajectory for a question about Art. As shown in the figure, the Planner first decom-poses the question into several subtasks. In the subtask “Evaluate how institutional changes, such as Brexit-related regulatory shifts ...”, it invokes the Structured and Unstructured Knowledge Ana-lyzers via two tool calls, respectively. The Structured Knowledge Analyzer then retrieves the table about “How have Brexit-related regulatory changes impacted the mobility of artists in the UK art Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY Wenxuan Liu et al. Structured Knowledge Analyzer 

> Please analyze the impact of the United Kingdom's post-2016 institutional and fiscal changes on its global art market
> position, specifically assessing the redistribution of value across key segments, including auctions, trade, and artist rankings.

Subtask Generation 

Unstructured Knowledge Analyzer                                        

> # Extract data
> data =data_structure [‘value’ ]
> years = [ item ['year' ]for item in data ]
> eu_exports = [ item ['eu' ]for item in data ]
> non_eu_exports = [ item ['non' ]for item in data ]
> …
> # Plot EU exports
> color ='tab:red'
> ax1 .set_xlabel ('Year' )
> ax1 .set_ylabel ('EU Exports (million GBP)' ,color =color )
> line1 =ax1 .plot (years ,eu_exports ,color =color ,marker ='o' ,label ='EU Exports' )
> ax1 .tick_params (axis ='y' ,labelcolor =color )
> # Create second y-axis for non-EU exports
> ax2 =ax1 .twinx ()
> color ='tab:blue'
> ax2 .set_ylabel ('Non-EU Exports (million GBP)' ,color =color )
> line2 =ax2 .plot (years ,non_eu_exports ,color =color ,marker ='s' ,label ='Non-EU Exports' )…
> 2. Code Generation
> To investigate the impact of Brexit on artist mobility, focusing on
> how …

Query Generation        

> 2. Evaluate how institutional changes, such as Brexit-related regulatory shifts, have affected the mobility and rankings of
> artists operating within or through the UK market.
> 1. Examine the redistribution of value across key art market segments in the UK, particularly comparing auction houses, ...
> 1. tool_calls=[{'name': 'S.K.A.', 'args': {'query': ' How have Brexit-related regulatory changes impacted the mobility of artists
> in the UK art market, particularly in terms of cross-border movement, exhibitions, and participation in international
> events? '}}]
> 2. tool_calls=[{'name': 'U.K.A.', 'args': {'query': ' Impact of Brexit on artist mobility UK art market EU exhibitions
> international fairs '}}] …
> 3. Code Execution
> Result Analysis: … Post-Brexit, EU
> exports surged dramatically ,rising from
> ~140 million GBP in 2020 to over 1300
> million GBP by 2022, while Non-EU
> exports collapsed from ~9000 million GBP
> in 2019 to under 3000 million GBP by 2024.
> This reversal suggests that Brexit-related
> regulatory changes may have redirected
> trade flows: increased friction or costs for
> exporting to non-EU markets appear…
> 3. Result Analysis
> 1.Intent Generation

Writer              

> …
> Value of works of art …
> by EU and non-EU.xlsx
> 1. Knowledge Reterival
> Query: How have
> Brexit-related
> regulatory changes
> …?
> Doc1: Brexit’s effects on the UK art market persist more than five
> years after the referendum, contributing to higher costs, more
> bureaucracy, and reduced trade efficiency…
> •https://www.artsy.net/article/artsy-editorial-brexit-impacting-
> british-art-market
> 3. Result Summarization
> 2. Web Search
> Annotated Key
> Point:
> Post-Brexit
> exports
> reoriented
> toward the EU
> while non-EU
> long-distance
> trade contracted
> materially, as
> evidenced by a
> sharp post-2019
> structural shift
> in UK art
> exports …

Figure 4: Case study for HKA. 

market...” and generates a figure and the corresponding insights about the differences between developed and developing countries. And Unstructured Knowledge Analyzer further search the “Impact of Brexit on artist mobility UK art market EU exhibitions inter-national fairs”. The Writer inserts the figure into the final report and integrates the corresponding insights into the textual content. Finally, the judge LLM recognizes that this text snippet matches an annotated key point. This case suggests the effectiveness of HKA and the evaluation framework. 

6 Conclusion 

In this paper, we introduced the Knowledgeable Deep Research (KDR) task, which requires deep research agents to generate re-ports grounded in both structured and unstructured knowledge. To tackle this task, we proposed the Hybrid Knowledge Analysis framework (HKA), a multi-agent architecture that reasons over both types of knowledge and composes generated text, figures, and tables into multimodal reports. To support evaluation, we con-structed KDR-Bench, which spanned 9 domains and comprised 41 expert-level questions with 1,252 reference tables, together with an LLM-based evaluation framework. Experimental results demon-strated that KDR remained challenging for existing DR agents, while HKA consistently outperformed strong baselines, highlighting the importance of explicit, data-driven analysis for future DR systems. 

References 

[1] Perplexity AI. 2025. Introducing Perplexity Deep Research. https://www. perplexity.ai/hub/blog/introducing-perplexity-deep-research. Accessed: 2025-12. [2] Anthropic. 2025. Claude Haiku 4.5 (Thinking). https://www.anthropic.com/ claude. Accessed via Anthropic API, model version: claude-haiku-4-5-20251001-thinking. [3] Jinze Bai, Shuai Bai, Yunfei Chu, Zeyu Cui, Kai Dang, Xiaodong Deng, Yang Fan, Wenbin Ge, Yu Han, and et al. 2023. Qwen Technical Report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.16609 (2023). [4] Shuai Bai, Yuxuan Cai, Ruizhe Chen, Keqin Chen, Xionghui Chen, Zesen Cheng, Lianghao Deng, Wei Ding, Chang Gao, Chunjiang Ge, Wenbin Ge, Zhifang Guo, Qidong Huang, Jie Huang, Fei Huang, Binyuan Hui, Shutong Jiang, Zhaohai Li, Mingsheng Li, Mei Li, Kaixin Li, Zicheng Lin, Junyang Lin, Xuejing Liu, Jiawei Liu, Chenglong Liu, Yang Liu, Dayiheng Liu, Shixuan Liu, Dunjie Lu, Ruilin Luo, Chenxu Lv, Rui Men, Lingchen Meng, Xuancheng Ren, Xingzhang Ren, Sibo Song, Yuchong Sun, Jun Tang, Jianhong Tu, Jianqiang Wan, Peng Wang, Pengfei Wang, Qiuyue Wang, Yuxuan Wang, Tianbao Xie, Yiheng Xu, Haiyang Xu, Jin Xu, Zhibo Yang, Mingkun Yang, Jianxin Yang, An Yang, Bowen Yu, Fei Zhang, Hang Zhang, Xi Zhang, Bo Zheng, Humen Zhong, Jingren Zhou, Fan Zhou, Jing Zhou, Yuanzhi Zhu, and Ke Zhu. 2025. Qwen3-VL Technical Report. arXiv:2511.21631 [cs.CV] https://arxiv.org/abs/2511.21631 [5] Islem Bouzenia and Michael Pradel. 2025. Understanding Software Engineering Agents: A Study of Thought-Action-Result Trajectories. arXiv:2506.18824 [cs.SE] https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.18824 [6] Zijian Chen, Xueguang Ma, Shengyao Zhuang, Ping Nie, Kai Zou, Andrew Liu, Joshua Green, Kshama Patel, Ruoxi Meng, Mingyi Su, Sahel Sharifymoghaddam, Yanxi Li, Haoran Hong, Xinyu Shi, Xuye Liu, Nandan Thakur, Crystina Zhang, Luyu Gao, Wenhu Chen, and Jimmy Lin. 2025. BrowseComp-Plus: A More Fair and Transparent Evaluation Benchmark of Deep-Research Agent. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.06600 (2025). [7] DeepSeek-AI, Aixin Liu, Bei Feng, Bing Xue, Bingxuan Wang, and Bochao Wu et. al. 2024. DeepSeek-V3 Technical Report. arXiv:2412.19437 [cs.CL] https: //arxiv.org/abs/2412.19437 [8] Guanting Dong, Licheng Bao, Zhongyuan Wang, Kangzhi Zhao, Xiaoxi Li, Jiajie Jin, Jinghan Yang, Hangyu Mao, Fuzheng Zhang, Kun Gai, Guorui Zhou, Yutao Zhu, Ji-Rong Wen, and Zhicheng Dou. 2025. Agentic Entropy-Balanced Policy Optimization. arXiv:2510.14545 [cs.LG] https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.14545 [9] Matthijs Douze, Alexandr Guzhva, Chengqi Deng, Jeff Johnson, Gergely Szilvasy, Pierre-Emmanuel Mazaré, Maria Lomeli, Lucas Hosseini, and Hervé Jégou. 2024. The Faiss library. (2024). arXiv:2401.08281 [cs.LG] [10] Mingxuan Du, Benfeng Xu, Chiwei Zhu, Xiaorui Wang, and Zhendong Mao. 2025. DeepResearch Bench: A Comprehensive Benchmark for Deep Research Agents. arXiv:2506.11763 [cs.CL] https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.11763 [11] Google. 2024. Gemini 2.0 Flash. https://gemini.google.com. Accessed: 12/2024. [12] Google AI. 2025. Gemini Deep Research Agent Documentation. https://ai.google. dev/gemini-api/docs/deep-research. Official documentation for Gemini Deep Research agent, accessed December 2025. [13] Xu Huang, Junwu Chen, Yuxing Fei, Zhuohan Li, Philippe Schwaller, and Ger-brand Ceder. 2025. CASCADE: Cumulative Agentic Skill Creation through Autonomous Development and Evolution. arXiv:2512.23880 [cs.AI] https: //arxiv.org/abs/2512.23880 [14] Rolf Jagerman, Honglei Zhuang, Zhen Qin, Xuanhui Wang, and Michael Bendersky. 2023. Query Expansion by Prompting Large Language Models. arXiv:2305.03653 [cs.IR] https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.03653 [15] Jiajie Jin, Yuyao Zhang, Yimeng Xu, Hongjin Qian, Yutao Zhu, and Zhicheng Dou. 2025. FinSight: Towards Real-World Financial Deep Research. arXiv:2510.16844 [cs.CL] https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.16844 [16] langchain-ai. 2025. Open Deep Research. https://github.com/langchain-ai/open_ deep_research. Open-source deep research agent built on LangGraph, accessed December 2025. [17] Kuan Li, Zhongwang Zhang, Huifeng Yin, Liwen Zhang, Litu Ou, Jialong Wu, Wenbiao Yin, Baixuan Li, Zhengwei Tao, Xinyu Wang, Weizhou Shen, Junkai Zhang, Dingchu Zhang, Xixi Wu, Yong Jiang, Ming Yan, Pengjun Xie, Fei Huang, and Jingren Zhou. 2025. WebSailor: Navigating Super-human Reasoning for Web Agent. arXiv:2507.02592 [cs.CL] https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.02592 [18] Xiaoxi Li, Jiajie Jin, Guanting Dong, Hongjin Qian, Yutao Zhu, Yongkang Wu, Ji-Rong Wen, and Zhicheng Dou. 2025. Webthinker: Empowering large reasoning models with deep research capability. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.21776 (2025). [19] Yuan Liang, Jiaxian Li, Yuqing Wang, Piaohong Wang, Motong Tian, Pai Liu, Shuofei Qiao, Runnan Fang, He Zhu, Ge Zhang, Minghao Liu, Yuchen Eleanor Jiang, Ningyu Zhang, and Wangchunshu Zhou. 2025. Towards Personalized Deep Research: Benchmarks and Evaluations. arXiv:2509.25106 [cs.CL] https: //arxiv.org/abs/2509.25106 [20] Fan Liu, Zherui Yang, Cancheng Liu, Tianrui Song, Xiaofeng Gao, and Hao Liu. 2025. MM-Agent: LLM as Agents for Real-world Mathematical Modeling Problem. arXiv:2505.14148 [cs.AI] https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.14148 [21] MiniMax-AI. 2025. MiniMax M2. https://github.com/MiniMax-AI/MiniMax-M2. Open-source model for coding and agentic workflows released by MiniMax_AI; accessed Oct 2025. [22] OpenAI. 2024. text-embedding-3 family embedding models. https://platform. openai.com/docs/api-reference/embeddings. Accessed: Month Day, Year. [23] OpenAI. 2025. Deep research System Card. https://cdn.openai.com/deep-research-system-card.pdf. Accessed: 2025-12. [24] Long Phan, Alice Gatti, Ziwen Han, Nathaniel Li, Josephina Hu, Hugh Zhang, Sean Shi, Michael Choi, Anish Agrawal, Arnav Chopra, Adam Khoja, Ryan Kim, Jason Hausenloy, Oliver Zhang, Mantas Mazeika, Daron Anderson, Tung Towards Knowledgeable Deep Research: Framework and Benchmark Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY 

Nguyen, Mobeen Mahmood, Fiona Feng, Steven Y. Feng, Haoran Zhao, Michael Yu, Varun Gangal, Chelsea Zou, Zihan Wang, Jessica P. Wang, Pawan Kumar, Oleksandr Pokutnyi, Robert Gerbicz, Serguei Popov, John-Clark Levin, Mstyslav Kazakov, Johannes Schmitt, Geoff Galgon, Alvaro Sanchez, Yongki Lee, Will Yeadon, Scott Sauers, Marc Roth, Chidozie Agu, Søren Riis, Fabian Giska, Saiteja Utpala, Zachary Giboney, Gashaw M. Goshu, Joan of Arc Xavier, Sarah-Jane Crowson, Mohinder Maheshbhai Naiya, Noah Burns, Lennart Finke, Zerui Cheng, Hyunwoo Park, Francesco Fournier-Facio, John Wydallis, Mark Nandor, Ankit Singh, Tim Gehrunger, Jiaqi Cai, Ben McCarty, Darling Duclosel, Jungbae Nam, Jennifer Zampese, Ryan G. Hoerr, Aras Bacho, Gautier Abou Loume, Abdallah Galal, Hangrui Cao, Alexis C. Garretson, Damien Sileo, Qiuyu Ren, Doru Cojoc, Pavel Arkhipov, Usman Qazi, Lianghui Li, Sumeet Motwani, Christian Schröder de Witt, Edwin Taylor, Johannes Veith, Eric Singer, Taylor D. Hartman, Paolo Rissone, Jaehyeok Jin, Jack Wei Lun Shi, Chris G. Willcocks, Joshua Robinson, Aleksandar Mikov, Ameya Prabhu, Longke Tang, Xavier Alapont, Justine Leon Uro, Kevin Zhou, Emily de Oliveira Santos, Andrey Pupasov Maksimov, Edward Vendrow, Kengo Zenitani, Julien Guillod, Yuqi Li, Joshua Vendrow, Vladyslav Kuchkin, and Ng Ze-An. 2025. Humanity’s Last Exam. CoRR abs/2501.14249 (2025). arXiv:2501.14249 doi:10.48550/ARXIV.2501.14249 [25] Akshara Prabhakar, Roshan Ram, Zixiang Chen, Silvio Savarese, Frank Wang, Caiming Xiong, Huan Wang, and Weiran Yao. 2025. Enterprise Deep Research: Steerable Multi-Agent Deep Research for Enterprise Analytics. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.17797 (2025). [26] Serper.dev. 2025. Serper: The World’s Fastest & Cheapest Google Search API. https://serper.dev/ [27] Zhengliang Shi, Yiqun Chen, Haitao Li, Weiwei Sun, Shiyu Ni, Yougang Lyu, Run-Ze Fan, Bowen Jin, Yixuan Weng, Minjun Zhu, Qiujie Xie, Xinyu Guo, Qu Yang, Jiayi Wu, Jujia Zhao, Xiaqiang Tang, Xinbei Ma, Cunxiang Wang, Jiaxin Mao, Qingyao Ai, Jen-Tse Huang, Wenxuan Wang, Yue Zhang, Yiming Yang, Zhaopeng Tu, and Zhaochun Ren. 2025. Deep Research: A Systematic Survey. arXiv:2512.02038 [cs.CL] https://arxiv.org/abs/2512.02038 [28] Aaditya Singh et al . 2026. OpenAI GPT-5 System Card. arXiv:2601.03267 [cs.CL] https://arxiv.org/abs/2601.03267 [29] GLM Team, Aohan Zeng, Xin Lv, Qinkai Zheng, Zhenyu Hou, Bin Chen, Chengx-ing Xie, Cunxiang Wang, Da Yin, Hao Zeng, Jiajie Zhang, Kedong Wang, Lucen Zhong, Mingdao Liu, Rui Lu, Shulin Cao, Xiaohan Zhang, Xuancheng Huang, Yao Wei, Yean Cheng, Yifan An, Yilin Niu, Yuanhao Wen, Yushi Bai, Zhengx-iao Du, Zihan Wang, Zilin Zhu, Bohan Zhang, Bosi Wen, Bowen Wu, Bowen Xu, Can Huang, Casey Zhao, Changpeng Cai, Chao Yu, Chen Li, Chendi Ge, Chenghua Huang, Chenhui Zhang, Chenxi Xu, Chenzheng Zhu, Chuang Li, Congfeng Yin, Daoyan Lin, Dayong Yang, Dazhi Jiang, Ding Ai, Erle Zhu, Fei Wang, Gengzheng Pan, Guo Wang, Hailong Sun, Haitao Li, Haiyang Li, Haiyi Hu, Hanyu Zhang, Hao Peng, Hao Tai, Haoke Zhang, Haoran Wang, Haoyu Yang, He Liu, He Zhao, Hongwei Liu, Hongxi Yan, Huan Liu, Huilong Chen, Ji Li, Jiajing Zhao, Jiamin Ren, Jian Jiao, Jiani Zhao, Jianyang Yan, Jiaqi Wang, Jiayi Gui, Jiayue Zhao, Jie Liu, Jijie Li, Jing Li, Jing Lu, Jingsen Wang, Jingwei Yuan, Jingxuan Li, Jingzhao Du, Jinhua Du, Jinxin Liu, Junkai Zhi, Junli Gao, Ke Wang, Lekang Yang, Liang Xu, Lin Fan, Lindong Wu, Lintao Ding, Lu Wang, Man Zhang, Ming-hao Li, Minghuan Xu, Mingming Zhao, Mingshu Zhai, Pengfan Du, Qian Dong, Shangde Lei, Shangqing Tu, Shangtong Yang, Shaoyou Lu, Shijie Li, Shuang Li, Shuang-Li, Shuxun Yang, Sibo Yi, Tianshu Yu, Wei Tian, Weihan Wang, Wenbo Yu, Weng Lam Tam, Wenjie Liang, Wentao Liu, Xiao Wang, Xiaohan Jia, Xiaotao Gu, Xiaoying Ling, Xin Wang, Xing Fan, Xingru Pan, Xinyuan Zhang, Xinze Zhang, Xiuqing Fu, Xunkai Zhang, Yabo Xu, Yandong Wu, Yida Lu, Yidong Wang, Yilin Zhou, Yiming Pan, Ying Zhang, Yingli Wang, Yingru Li, Yinpei Su, Yipeng Geng, Yitong Zhu, Yongkun Yang, Yuhang Li, Yuhao Wu, Yujiang Li, Yunan Liu, Yunqing Wang, Yuntao Li, Yuxuan Zhang, Zezhen Liu, Zhen Yang, Zhengda Zhou, Zhongpei Qiao, Zhuoer Feng, Zhuorui Liu, Zichen Zhang, Zihan Wang, Zijun Yao, Zikang Wang, Ziqiang Liu, Ziwei Chai, Zixuan Li, Zuodong Zhao, Wenguang Chen, Jidong Zhai, Bin Xu, Minlie Huang, Hongning Wang, Juanzi Li, Yuxiao Dong, and Jie Tang. 2025. GLM-4.5: Agentic, Reasoning, and Coding (ARC) Foundation Models. arXiv:2508.06471 [cs.CL] https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.06471 [30] Tongyi DeepResearch Team, Baixuan Li, Bo Zhang, Dingchu Zhang, Fei Huang, Guangyu Li, Guoxin Chen, Huifeng Yin, Jialong Wu, Jingren Zhou, et al . 2025. Tongyi DeepResearch Technical Report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.24701 (2025). [31] Tencent. 2024. Hunyuan 2.0. https://hunyuan.tencent.com. Accessed via Hunyuan API, model version: Hunyuan2.0. [32] thinkdepthai. 2025. Deep_Research: ThinkDepth.ai Deep Research. https://github. com/thinkdepthai/Deep_Research. GitHub repository, accessed on 2025-12-27. [33] UncleCode. 2024. Crawl4AI: Open-source LLM Friendly Web Crawler & Scraper .[34] Haiyuan Wan, Chen Yang, Junchi Yu, Meiqi Tu, Jiaxuan Lu, Di Yu, Jianbao Cao, Ben Gao, Jiaqing Xie, Aoran Wang, Wenlong Zhang, Philip Torr, and Dongzhan Zhou. 2025. DeepResearch Arena: The First Exam of LLMs’ Research Abilities via Seminar-Grounded Tasks. arXiv:2509.01396 [cs.AI] https://arxiv.org/abs/ 2509.01396 [35] Jason Wei, Zhiqing Sun, Spencer Papay, Scott McKinney, Jeffrey Han, Isa Fulford, Hyung Won Chung, Alex Tachard Passos, William Fedus, and Amelia Glaese. 2025. BrowseComp: A Simple Yet Challenging Benchmark for Browsing Agents. arXiv:2504.12516 [cs.CL] https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.12516 [36] Junde Wu, Jiayuan Zhu, Yuyuan Liu, Min Xu, and Yueming Jin. 2025. Agen-tic Reasoning: A Streamlined Framework for Enhancing LLM Reasoning with Agentic Tools. arXiv:2502.04644 [cs.AI] https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.04644 [37] xAI. 2025. Grok 4 Model Card. https://data.x.ai/2025-08-20-grok-4-model-card.pdf. Official Grok 4 model card, August 2025. [38] Renjun Xu and Jingwen Peng. 2025. A Comprehensive Survey of Deep Research: Systems, Methodologies, and Applications. arXiv:2506.12594 [cs.AI] https:// arxiv.org/abs/2506.12594 [39] An Yang, Anfeng Li, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chang Gao, Chengen Huang, Chenxu Lv, Chujie Zheng, Dayiheng Liu, Fan Zhou, Fei Huang, Feng Hu, Hao Ge, Haoran Wei, Huan Lin, Jialong Tang, Jian Yang, Jianhong Tu, Jianwei Zhang, Jianxin Yang, Jiaxi Yang, Jing Zhou, Jingren Zhou, Junyang Lin, Kai Dang, Keqin Bao, Kexin Yang, Le Yu, Lianghao Deng, Mei Li, Mingfeng Xue, Mingze Li, Pei Zhang, Peng Wang, Qin Zhu, Rui Men, Ruize Gao, Shixuan Liu, Shuang Luo, Tianhao Li, Tianyi Tang, Wenbiao Yin, Xingzhang Ren, Xinyu Wang, Xinyu Zhang, Xuancheng Ren, Yang Fan, Yang Su, Yichang Zhang, Yinger Zhang, Yu Wan, Yuqiong Liu, Zekun Wang, Zeyu Cui, Zhenru Zhang, Zhipeng Zhou, and Zihan Qiu. 2025. Qwen3 Technical Report. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.09388 (2025). [40] Yi Yao, He Zhu, Piaohong Wang, Jincheng Ren, Xinlong Yang, Qianben Chen, Xiaowan Li, Dingfeng Shi, Jiaxian Li, Qiexiang Wang, Sinuo Wang, Xinpeng Liu, Jiaqi Wu, Minghao Liu, and Wangchunshu Zhou. 2026. O-Researcher: An Open Ended Deep Research Model via Multi-Agent Distillation and Agentic RL. arXiv:2601.03743 [cs.CL] https://arxiv.org/abs/2601.03743 [41] Guibin Zhang, Hejia Geng, Xiaohang Yu, Zhenfei Yin, Zaibin Zhang, Zelin Tan, Heng Zhou, Zhongzhi Li, Xiangyuan Xue, Yijiang Li, Yifan Zhou, Yang Chen, Chen Zhang, Yutao Fan, Zihu Wang, Songtao Huang, Francisco Piedrahita-Velez, Yue Liao, Hongru Wang, Mengyue Yang, Heng Ji, Jun Wang, Shuicheng Yan, Philip Torr, and Lei Bai. 2025. The Landscape of Agentic Reinforcement Learning for LLMs: A Survey. arXiv:2509.02547 [cs.AI] https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.02547 [42] Yuxiang Zheng, Dayuan Fu, Xiangkun Hu, Xiaojie Cai, Lyumanshan Ye, Pengrui Lu, and Pengfei Liu. 2025. DeepResearcher: Scaling Deep Research via Rein-forcement Learning in Real-world Environments. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.03160 

(2025). [43] Peilin Zhou, Bruce Leon, Xiang Ying, Can Zhang, Yifan Shao, Qichen Ye, Dading Chong, Zhiling Jin, Chenxuan Xie, Meng Cao, Yuxin Gu, Sixin Hong, Jing Ren, Jian Chen, Chao Liu, and Yining Hua. 2025. BrowseComp-ZH: Benchmarking Web Browsing Ability of Large Language Models in Chinese. arXiv:2504.19314 [cs.CL] https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.19314