Title: Reasoning About Probabilities, Actions, and Knowledge in Fuzzy Modal Logic

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.22459v1

Published Time: Mon, 27 Apr 2026 00:40:19 GMT

Number of Pages: 19

Markdown Content:
# Reasoning About Probabilities, Actions, and Knowledge in Fuzzy Modal Logic 

# Daniil Kozhemiachenko 1 , Igor Sedlár 21Aix Marseille Univ, CNRS, LIS, Marseille, France 

> 2

# Institute of Computer Science, The Czech Academy of Sciences, Prague, Czech Republic daniil.kozhemiachenko@lis-lab.fr, sedlar@cs.cas.cz 

Abstract 

We explore a fuzzy modal logic that can formalise proba-bilistic reasoning about actions and knowledge. In particular, we deal with contexts involving statements about events ex-pressed via modal formulas, e.g., ‘after doing a, the probabil-ity of A knowing that p holds increases / decreases / is equal to 0.25 ’, ‘according to A, p is equally likely to happen after doing a or b’, etc. We define the semantics of the logic on Kripke frames equipped with probability measures. We anal-yse the complexity of deciding the satisfiability of formulas of our logic over finitely branching models, for the full lan-guage and its fragments of varying expressivity. In particular, we identify several fragments of our logic where satisfiability is decidable in polynomial time. 

# 1 Introduction 

Probabilistic reasoning is a well-established field in arti-ficial intelligence and knowledge representation and rea-soning. It has found numerous applications in logic pro-gramming (Ng and Subrahmanian 1992; Lukasiewicz 1998; Riguzzi and Swift 2018), ontologies (Lukasiewicz 2008; Peñaloza 2020), and formal argumentation (Li, Oren, and Norman 2012; Fazzinga, Flesca, and Parisi 2015). An im-portant approach to the formalisation of probabilistic rea-soning is probabilistic logics . These are formal systems that formalise reasoning with probabilistic statements such as ‘if the probability of p is twice as much as the probability of q,then the probability of q is less than 0.5’. In this paper, we consider a fuzzy modal logic that can for-malise probabilistic reasoning about actions and knowledge. We study the complexity of the full language and its frag-ments, including those for which satisfiability is decidable in polynomial time. This presents a perspective on the compu-tational properties of formal verification and automated rea-soning with probabilistic specifications that describe agents’ knowledge and actions. 

Probabilistic Logics Probabilistic logics were first pro-posed by Nilsson (1986). The propositional fragment of Nilsson’s logic was further studied by Fagin et al. (1990). Later, Fagin and Halpern (1994) considered an expansion of probabilistic logic with epistemic modalities. Bacchus et al. (1999) propose a framework for a probabilistic logic of action and belief based on Reiter’s situation calculus. Halpern and Pucella (2002) considered logics with operators expressing upper probabilities to model qualitative uncer-tainty about probabilities. Halpern and O’Neill (2005) apply probabilistic epistemic logic to reasoning about anonymity in multi-agent systems. Since then, even more expressive systems of probabilis-tic logics have been extensively studied. In particular, Ogn-janovic et al. (2012), Doder and Perovic (2020), and Do-der and Ognjanovic (2024) consider temporal probabilistic logic. Tomovic et al. (2020) studied an epistemic expansion of the first-order probabilistic logic, and Doder et al. (2020) explored a multi-agent logic for reasoning about lower and upper probabilities. 

Probabilistic Reasoning in Fuzzy Logics An important alternative approach to probabilistic logics is to use so-called 

fuzzy logics to reason about probabilities. Fuzzy logics were introduced by Zadeh (1965; 1975) to reason about imprecise statements such as ‘it is cold outside’, ‘the symptoms are se-vere’, etc. In fuzzy logics, formulas are evaluated over the interval [0 , 1] , and their values are interpreted as degrees of truth from 0 (absolutely false) to 1 (absolutely true). Fuzzy logics have multiple applications in artificial intelligence. In particular, He et al. (2003) develop an autonomous bid-ding strategy based on fuzzy logic. Semantics of fuzzy logic is used to support learning and reasoning in real-world do-mains (Diligenti, Gori, and Saccà 2017; Badreddine et al. 2022) and statistical relational learning (Bach et al. 2017). Furthermore, van Krieken et al. (2022) analyse the interac-tion between different fuzzy logic semantics and learning. Chen et al. (2022) use fuzzy logic in reasoning problems with knowledge graphs. Reasoning about uncertainty in fuzzy logics is usually for-malised with two-layered formulas . Namely, the probability of an event α (inner or event formula ) is the truth degree of the probabilistic atom — the formula Pr (α), interpreted as ‘ α is probable’. Initially (Hájek and Harmancová 1995; Hájek, Godo, and Esteva 1995), the events were formalised using classical propositional formulas, and probabilistic atoms were combined with connectives of Łukasiewicz logic into outer formulas . Hájek et al. (2000) expand this frame-work into the language of Product fuzzy logic with ratio-nal constants (Esteva, Godo, and Montagna 2001) to ex-press thresholds and conditional probabilities. It is shown 

> arXiv:2604.22459v1 [cs.LO] 24 Apr 2026

by Baldi et al. (2020) that propositional fuzzy probabilis-tic logics have the same expressivity as logics of Fagin et al. (1990). It is argued that the same expressive power comes with a much simpler syntax and axiomatisation. Modal expansions of fuzzy probabilistic logics have also been extensively studied. In particular, Godo et al. (2003) expressed Dempster–Shafer belief functions with formulas of the form Pr (□α). Using the work of Marchioni (2008), Corsi et al. (2023) showed that lower probabilities can be expressed via formulas of the form □Pr (α). They consid-ered a logic where epistemic modalities are used to both ex-press events and statements about their probabilities. Majer and Sedlár (2025) and Kozhemiachenko and Sedlár (2025) considered a fuzzy probabilistic modal logic with arbitrary 

□-like modalities and propositional event formulas, allow-ing for a broader model of lower probabilities where uncer-tainty is not necessarily epistemic in nature, but may arise as a result of non-determinism in outcomes of actions. 

Contributions Although probabilistic fuzzy modal logics have received much attention, to the best of our knowledge, the framework proposed by Corsi et al. (2023) is the only one where modalities can appear on both layers. It also seems that the computational properties of such logics are considerably less studied. Thus, in this paper, we bring to-gether the frameworks of (Corsi et al. 2023) and (Majer and Sedlár 2025) and explore a logic that we call EA Pr , whose language is based upon a modal expansion of the combined Łukasiewicz and Product logics where epistemic and action modalities appear both in inner- and outer-layer formulas. As we will see in Section 3, this enables us to reason with a wide range of events and express various relations between their probabilities. We show that the language can (i) express probabilistic statements about modal events involving knowledge or ef-fects of actions (e.g. statements about the probability of an agent knowing a proposition or a proposition holding after a specific action is performed) and (ii) represent lower and upper probabilities of events arising from epistemic uncer-tainty or from uncertainty about outcomes of actions. As we discuss in more detail below, system specifications of these forms are important in areas such as multi-agent systems, cybersecurity, and robotics. The main technical result in the paper is an extensive study of the complexity of EA Pr . We establish that the va-lidity (and satisfiability) problem for arbitrary formulas over finitely-branching models is PSPACE -complete. We also consider several fragments of our language where validity is decidable in polynomial time . Our contributions shed light on the computational features of formal verification and au-tomated reasoning for probabilistic action-epistemic specifi-cations within our expressive framework. 

Plan of the Paper The text is structured as follows. In Section 2, we present the language and semantics of EA Pr .We discuss its expressivity in Section 3. In Sections 4 and 5, we study the complexity of EA Pr and its fragments. In Sec-tion 6, we discuss related work in modal probabilistic log-ics. We summarise our results and outline the future work in Section 7. Omitted proofs are put in the appendix of the technical report ((Kozhemiachenko and Sedlár 2026)). 

# 2 Language and Semantics 

We begin with the definition of the event language .

Definition 1. Let Act and Agt be two countable sets of labels, representing the set of basic actions and the set of agents, respectively. Let Var be a countable set of propo-sitional variables, expressing basic events. The set Levt of 

event formulas is defined using the following grammar: 

Levt ∋ α := p | ∼ α | α ∧ α | KAα | [a]α

where p ∈ Var , A ∈ Agt and a ∈ Act .

As one can see, Levt is a variant of the classical multi-modal language containing knowledge modalities KA for agents A ∈ Agt (where KAα means that ‘the agent A knows that α’) in combination with action modalities [a] for actions 

a ∈ Act (where [a]α means that ‘ α holds in all states that can be obtained by doing a’). 

Definition 2 (Event frames and models) .

• An event frame is a tuple F = ⟨W, E, R⟩ where W̸ = ∅,

E is a function from Agt to the set of equivalence relations on W , and R : Act → 2W ×W .

• An event model is a tuple E = ⟨W, E, R, V ⟩ with 

⟨W, E, R⟩ being an event frame and V : Var → 2W .

Given a model E, we will write WE, EE, RE, and VE to denote, respectively, the set of states of E, its epistemic and action relations, and its valuation. Informally, W is a set of possible states of the environ-ment (or possible worlds). The equivalence relation EA

for A ∈ Agt represents the epistemic state of agent A:

⟨w, u ⟩ ∈ EA (written also as EAwu or wEAu) means that, in state w, the agent A lacks sufficient information to distin-guish state w from state u. Similarly, the relation Ra rep-resents possible outcomes of performing action a ∈ Act :

⟨w, u ⟩ ∈ Ra (written also as Rawu or wRau) means that 

u is a possible outcome of performing a in state w. That is, we do not assume that actions are deterministic. We define 

Ra(w) := {w′ | wRaw′} and EA(w) := {w′ | wEAw′}. Fi-nally, the valuation function V assigns to each propositional variable p ∈ Var an event , that is, a subset of W . This event will also be denoted as ∥p∥E. Events ∥α∥E for complex event formulas are defined as usual in modal logic: 

∥∼ α∥E = W \ ∥ α∥E

∥α1 ∧ α2∥E = ∥α1∥E ∩ ∥ α2∥E

∥KAα∥E = KA∥α∥E := {w | EA(w) ⊆ ∥ α∥E}∥[a]α∥E = Ra∥α∥E := {w | Ra(w) ⊆ ∥ α∥E}

Definition 3 (Probability space) . A probability space over an event model E=⟨W, E, R, V ⟩ is a pair S=⟨F, μ ⟩ s.t.: 

• F is a collection of subsets of W which contains W and 

V (p) for all p ∈ Var ; and is closed under complements, finite unions and the operators KA, Ra for all A ∈ Agt 

and a ∈ Act ;• μ is a finitely additive probability measure on F.

Definition 4 (Probabilistic models) . A probabilistic model is a tuple F = ⟨W, F, E, R, μ, V ⟩ s.t. ⟨W, E, R, V ⟩ is an event model and ⟨F, μ ⟩ = ⟨Fw,A , μ w,A ⟩w∈W,A ∈Agt is a tuple of probability spaces over ⟨W, E, R, V ⟩ for each w ∈ W and 

A ∈ Agt .

Intuitively, μw,A (X) is the subjective probability of X for agent A in state w. To achieve generality, we do not assume that the same events are measurable for each agent in each state. This design choice gives rise to the plurality of prob-ability spaces ⟨F, μ ⟩. To express reasoning about events and their probabilities, we will use a language based on the fuzzy modal logic. We thus undertake the approach pro-posed by Hájek et al. (1995; 1998; 2000). The propositional fragment of our language is based on that of ŁΠ 12 — the logic that combines connectives of Łukasiewicz and Prod-uct logics. We further expand it with epistemic and action modalities corresponding to those in the event language. 

Definition 5. The full probabilistic language LPr EA is defined using the following grammar: 

ϕ := Pr A(α) | ¬ ϕ | ϕ→ϕ | ϕ•ϕ | ϕ→Πϕ | 12 | KAϕ | [a]ϕ

where α ∈ Levt , A ∈ Agt and a ∈ Act .

Definition 6. Given a probabilistic model M, we define M-interpretation as a function IM : LPr EA × WM → [0 , 1] s.t.: 

IM(Pr A(α), w ) = μw,A (∥α∥M)

IM(¬ϕ, w ) = 1 − IM(ϕ, w )

IM(ϕ→χ, w ) = min(1 , 1 − IM(ϕ, w ) + IM(χ, w )) 

IM(ϕ • χ, w ) = IM(ϕ, w ) · IM(χ, w )

IM(ϕ→Πχ, w ) = 



1 if IM(ϕ, w ) ≤ IM(χ, w )

IM(χ, w )

IM(ϕ, w ) otherwise; 

IM( 12 , w ) = 12

IM(KAϕ, w ) = inf {IM(ϕ, w ′) | wEAw′}

IM([ a]ϕ, w ) = inf {IM(ϕ, w ′) | wRaw′}

Definition 7. Let Γ ∪ { χ} ⊆ LPr EA be finite. We say that 

• χ is EA Pr -satisfiable (on a frame F) iff there is a proba-bilistic model M (on F) and w ∈ M s.t. IM(χ, w ) = 1 ;

• χ is EA Pr -valid (on F) iff for every probabilistic model M

(on F) and every w ∈ M, it holds that IM(χ, w ) = 1 ;

• Γ entails χ iff IM(χ, w ) = 1 for every probabilistic model M and w ∈ M s.t. IM(ϕ, w ) = 1 for all ϕ ∈ Γ.

Convention 1. We will further use ⟨a⟩ϕ and bKAϕ as short-hands for ¬[a]¬ϕ and ¬KA¬ϕ, respectively. Modalities 

KA and [a] are called box-like , and modalities bKA and ⟨a⟩

diamond-like . We will also use ■ to denote (sequences of) arbitrary box-like modalities: [a]KB [c], KAKB[c], etc. Sim-ilarly, ♦ stands for (sequences) of diamond-like modalities. In addition, we define 

1 := 12 → 12 ϕ⊕χ := ¬ϕ→χ △ϕ := ¬(ϕ→Π0) 0 := ¬1 ϕ⊙χ := ¬(ϕ→¬ χ)

The semantics of these connectives is derived from Defini-tion 6: 

IM(bKAϕ, w ) = sup {IM(ϕ, w ′) | wEAw′}

IM(⟨a⟩ϕ, w ) = sup {IM(ϕ, w ′) | wRaw′}

IM(ϕ ⊕ χ, w ) = min(1 , IM(ϕ, w ) + IM(χ, w )) 

IM(ϕ ⊙ χ, w ) = max(0 , IM(ϕ, w ) + IM(χ, w ) − 1) 

IM(1 , w ) = 1 

IM(0 , w ) = 0 IM(△ϕ, w ) = 

1 if IM(ϕ, w ) = 1 0 otherwise 

Let us briefly explain the semantics of connectives in Def-inition 6 and Convention 1. One can see that both implica-tions, → and →Π are order-preserving. ⊕ is the truncated sum on [0 , 1] , and △ helps form crisp statements. Moreover, 

¬, ⊙, ⊕, and → interact in the classical way: ¬ϕ ⊕ χ is equivalent to ϕ → χ, and ¬(ϕ⊕χ) is equivalent to ¬ϕ⊙¬ χ.Notice also that ■Pr A(α) and ♦Pr A(α) express lower and 

upper probability of α in accessible states. 

Definition 8. Let W̸ = ∅ and F ⊆ 2W be given as in Def-inition 3. Let further, M be a set of probability measures on F and X ∈ F. We define the lower and upper probabil-ities of X (μ∗(X) and μ∗(X), respectively) as follows: 

μ∗(X)= inf {μ(X)|μ∈M} μ∗(X)= sup {μ(X)|μ∈M}

We will conclude the section with a few brief observa-tions. First, for every rational number mn , one can define an LPr EA formula mn s.t. IM( mn , w ) = mn in all probabilis-tic models, using {¬ , ⊕, •, →Π, 12 } (cf. (Esteva, Godo, and Montagna 2001, Theorem 7)). Second, note that satisfiabil-ity and validity in EA Pr are reducible to one another in an expected way. Namely, ϕ is satisfiable iff ¬△ ϕ is not valid ,and, conversely, ϕ is valid iff ¬△ ϕ is unsatisfiable . Third, finitary entailment is reducible to validity: ϕ entails χ iff 

△ϕ → χ is valid. 

# 3 Expressivity 

The key feature of our language is its use of modal oper-ators both in the event layer and in the probabilistic layer. Importantly, the modal operators are not limited to S5 -style epistemic operators expressing ‘agent A knows that. . . ’, but they include general K-style action operators expressing ‘. . . holds after action a is performed’. This combined lan-guage is rather expressive, as we show in this section. We first point out that the event layer of our language can express various kinds of modal events .

Example 1 (Some modal events) .

• ‘After action a is performed, p will hold’: [a]p.

• ‘A knows that p’: KAp.

• ‘After a is performed, A will know that p’: [a]KAp.

• ‘A knows that after a is performed, p will hold’: KA[a]p.

Our probabilistic operator Pr A that expresses subjective probability of agent A can then be used to represent proba-bilities of these events. We will treat objective probability as a particular case of subjective probability. Formally, we will assume that ob ∈ Agt and write Pr ob in our examples when dealing with objective probability. Reasoning about probabilities of such modal events is crucial in various areas. In multi-agent systems, e.g., card games (Brown and Sandholm 2019), agents need to reason about what other agents know, and this reasoning is often based on probabilistic information. In cybersecurity, a se-curity system needs to be able to reason probabilistically about what the attacker might know (Barthe et al. 2013). Probabilistic robotics (Thrun, Burgard, and Fox 2005) is well-studied. In particular, in human-robot interaction sce-narios, human controllers often need to take into account what robots with possibly faulty sensors are likely to know in a given situation (Akkaladevi et al. 2021). Using propositional connectives of the fuzzy logic ŁΠ 12 ,we can express comparisons between probabilistic state-ments, including threshold comparisons. • ‘According to A, it’s not much more likely that p is go-ing to happen if action a is performed than if action b is performed’: 

Pr A([ a]p) → Pr A([ b]p)

• ‘Agent A likely knows that p’:  

> 12

→ Pr ob (KAp)

• ‘The probability that A knows that p is at least 0.7’: 

△(0 .7 → Pr ob (KAp)) 

• ‘According to agent A, it’s twice as likely for p to hold after a is performed that it is for p to fail’: 

△( 12 • Pr A([ a]p) ↔ Pr A([ a]¬p)) 

The following examples illustrate the expressivity of our logic in the setting of automated bidding agents. 

Example 2. Consider two competing automated bidding agents A and B. Agent A needs to decide whether to place a high bid. The decision depends on A’s subjective proba-bility of B’s knowing that the item they bid for is rare. The subjective probability is represented by the atomic probabilistic formula Pr A(KB rare ). The truth degree of the implicational formula 0.7 → Pr A(KB rare ) is 1 if A’s subjective probability of B knowing rare is no less that 0.7

and is the difference between A’s subjective probability of 

B knowing rare and 0.7 otherwise (cf. Definition 6). Using the delta operator, we can express the crisp state-ment that A’s subjective probability of B knowing rare is at least 0.7. This is expressed by △(0 .7 → Pr A(KB rare )) .Compare this to the imprecise statement that A’s subjective probability of B knowing rare is not much less than 0.7:

0.7 → Pr A(KB rare ).

Example 3. Assume that there is an auction with two par-ticipants: A and B. One of the things A can do is to place an aggressive bid (a). Now A’s subjective probability that 

B fill fold after A places an aggressive bid is formalised by the formula Pr A([ a]( B folds )) . Using rational constants, we can express bounds on subjective probabilities. E.g., the truth degree of formula 0.7 → Pr A([ a]( B folds )) is in-versely proportional to the amount to which 0.7 exceeds A’s subjective probability that B fill fold after A places an ag-gressive bid, and △(0 .7 → Pr A([ a]( B folds ))) says that 

A’s subjective probability that B fill fold after A places an aggressive bid is not less than 0.7.Moreover, we can express comparisons between sub-jective probabilities of the outcomes of different actions. Let m represent agent A placing a modest bid ; then 

Pr A([ m]( B folds )) → Pr A([ a]( B folds )) formalises the imprecise statement that A’s subjective probability that 

B will fold after A places an aggressive bid is not much less than A’s subjective probability that B will fold after 

A places a modest bid. Note that the delta operator △ can turn an imprecise comparison into a precise one — the for-mula △(Pr A([ m]( B folds )) → Pr A([ a]( B folds ))) says that A’s subjective probability that B fill fold after A places an aggressive bid is not less than A’s subjective probability that B fill fold after A places a modest bid. 

Modal operators in the probabilistic layer can, in turn, for-malise upper and lower probabilities (recall Definition 8) ex-pressing qualitative uncertainty about probability. This un-certainty can arise from the lack of information on an agent’s side, or from the fact that outcomes of actions are not deter-mined, for example. Upper and lower probabilities are also useful when specifying the effects of actions on probabilities of events. • ‘Performing b cannot substantially decrease the probabil-ity that performing a will lead to p being true’: 

Pr ob ([ a]p) → [b]Pr ob ([ a]p)

• ‘Performing a cannot substantially increase the probabil-ity of agent A knowing that p’: 

[a]Pr ob (KAp) → Pr ob (KAp)

• ‘The amount of qualitative uncertainty of agent A con-cerning event p is not much higher than 0.2’: 

0.2 → (KAPr ob (p) ↔ bKAPr ob (p)) 

Example 4. In the context of the previous bidding example, assume that A made a subtle, revealing bid. Agent A does not know what B’s subjective probability of ‘ A has a strong hand’ ( A strong ) is after the revealing bid, A only has a range of possibilities. The formula KA(Pr B (A strong )) 

expresses the infimum of the values of Pr B (A strong )

across these possibilities — B’s lower subjective probability of A strong across the possibilities left open by agent A.Using Łukasiewicz implication, we can express com-parisons between the lower probability and the ‘actual’ probability, for instance. This is done by the formula 

Pr B (A strong ) → KA(Pr B (A strong )) that expresses the truth degree of the imprecise statement that B’s subjective probability of A strong is not much lower than lower B’s probability of A strong (i.e. ‘what A considers possible’). We can explicitly express the fact that we are looking at probabilities after the revealing bid using the action modality [r]. In particular, the formula [r]Pr B (A strong )

expresses the infimum of B’s subjective probabilities of 

A strong in all possible outcomes of the action r. Sim-ilarly, the formula [r]KA(Pr B (A strong )) expresses the infimum of B’s lower subjective probability of A strong 

across the possibilities left open by agent A after r. As before, we can use Łukasiewicz implication to express a comparison of these infima: [r]Pr B (A strong ) →

[r]KA(Pr B (A strong )) .

We finish the section with the following observation. It is known from (Majer and Sedlár 2025) that the logic 

KŁ Π 12 

> Pr

proposed there lacks the finite model property (FMP). In particular, ϕ = △⟨ a⟩Pr A(p) → ⟨ a⟩△ Pr A(p) is valid in all finite frames but can be falsified in a model M

that contains a state w s.t. Ra(w) = {wi | i ∈ N}; it suffices to set IM(Pr A(p), w i) = ii+1 . Dually, ¬△ ϕ is unsatisfi-able on every finite frame, but can be satisfied on the same infinitely branching model that falsifies ϕ. As KŁ Π 12 

> Pr

is a fragment of EA Pr , it follows that the latter also lacks FMP. In most practical applications, however, it is sufficient to consider finite models. Still, the technical results presented in the next section apply to a slightly more general class of models: the finitely branching ones. These models represent situations in which an action can have only a finite number of possible outcomes, or in which an agent considers only a finite number of possibilities (i.e. their information in any state is consistent with only a finite number of states). A similar restriction on models is often used in fuzzy de-scription logics. Namely (cf. work by Hájek (2007), Bo-billo et al. (2009; 2012) and Borgwardt et al. (2014a; 2014b; 2015; 2017)), one may consider witnessed interpretations, i.e., those with the following property. If a quantified asser-tion [∀R.C]( a) has value x, then there must be an individ-ual b s.t. R(a, b ) and C(b) has value x.In the remainder of the paper, we will mostly consider the satisfiability of LPr EA formulas over finitely branching 

frames. In what follows, we will use EA Pr fb to stand for the logic EA Pr interpreted over finitely-branching frames. We will also say that ϕ ∈ LPr EA is EA Pr fb -valid (EA Pr fb -satisfiable) meaning that ϕ is EA Pr -valid on all ( EA Pr -satisfiable on some) finitely branching frames. 

# 4 Decidability of EA Pr fb 

In this section, we will establish the decidability of EA Pr fb -satisfiability (and hence, validity). To do that, we will pro-ceed as follows. We begin with constructing a terminating tableaux calculus for EA ŁΠ 

> fb

— the fragment of EA Pr fb without event formulas . Then we will use these tableaux to devise a decision procedure for EA Pr fb .Let us first define LEA — the language of EA ŁΠ 

> fb

.

Definition 9. Let p ∈ Var , A ∈ Agt , and a ∈ Act , we define ϕ ∈ LEA as follows: 

ϕ := p | ¬ ϕ | ϕ → ϕ | ϕ • ϕ | ϕ →Π ϕ | 12 | KAϕ | [a]ϕ

The semantics of EA ŁΠ 

> fb

can be obtained in the expected manner by restricting the interpretation functions from Def-inition 6 onto finitely branching event frames .

Definition 10. An EA ŁΠ 

> fb

-model is M = ⟨W, E, R, v ⟩

with ⟨W, E, R⟩ being a finitely branching event frame and 

v : Var → [0 , 1] . The EA ŁΠ 

> fb

-interpretation induced by M is 

IM : W × LEA → [0 , 1] s.t. IM(p, w ) = v(p, w ), and the values of complex formulas are computed according to Def-inition 6. The notions of EA ŁΠ 

> fb

-satisfiability, validity, and entailment are also adapted from Definition 6. Remark 1. We note that EA ŁΠ and EA Pr are connected in the following way. Given ϕ∈LPr EA , one can think of it as an 

LEA -formula ϕ↑ where each probabilistic atom Pr A(α) is replaced by a fresh variable pA,α . In this interpretation, ϕ is satisfied in a probabilistic model M = ⟨W, F, E, R, μ, V ⟩ iff 

ϕ↑ is satisfied in the EA ŁΠ-model M↑ = ⟨W, E, R, V ↑⟩ on the same frame s.t. V ↑(pA,α , w ) = IM(Pr A(α)) .

Convention 2. Given a formula ϕ and a set of formulas Γ,we use l(ϕ) and l[Γ] to denote their lengths , i.e., the num-ber of symbols in them. 

Let us now present a tableaux calculus for EA ŁΠ 

> fb

. We adapt the idea of ‘constraint tableaux’ by Hähnle (1999) for the modal logic framework. We first define constraints 

that encode the values of formulas in states and relational terms that represent relations between different states on the branch of the tableau. 

Definition 11 (Constraints) . We fix a countable set W =

{w, w ′, w 0, w 1, . . . } of state labels and define: 

• a labelled formula as w:ϕ with w ∈ W and ϕ ∈ LEA ;

• a formulaic constraint as w:ϕ▽P s.t. w:ϕ is a labelled formula, ▽ ∈ {≤ , ≥} and P a polynomial over [0 , 1] with integer coefficients; 

• a numerical constraint as w:P ◁P ′ with w∈W, ◁∈{≤ , < },and P and P ′ polynomials. 

Definition 12 (Relational terms) . For sets Act and Agt of 

actions and agents , we fix sets of action and epistemic rela-tional labels — Ac = {Ra | a ∈ Act } and Cl = {cl Ai | A ∈

Agt , i ∈ N} — and define: 

• an action relational term to be wRaw′ with w, w ′ ∈ W

and Ra ∈ Ac ;

• an epistemic relational term to be w ∈ cl Ai with w ∈ W,

i ∈ N, and cl Ai ∈ Cl .

Note from the definition above that epistemic labels cor-respond to subsets of the model. Namely, given a model M

each cl Ai is an equivalence class on M under EA.We are now ready to present the rules and formally define the notion of a tableaux proof . Our calculus T(EA ŁΠ 

> fb

) ex-pands T(KŁ Π 12 fb ) by Kozhemiachenko and Sedlár (2025) with rules for epistemic modalities. 

Definition 13 (T(EA ŁΠ 

> fb

) — constraint tableaux for EA ŁΠ 

> fb

).

A constraint tableau is a downward branching tree of formu-laic constraints , numerical constraints , and relational terms .A branch can be extended by an application of a rule from Fig. 1. Given a tableau branch B, we let WB = {w | w ∈

W, w occurs on B} and define for every w ∈ WB the sets of formulaic (Fw) and numerical (Nw) constraints as well as their corresponding systems of inequalities FI 

> w

and NI

> w

(below, xw:ϕ is a variable over [0 , 1] ): 

Fw = {w:ϕ▽P | w:ϕ▽P ∈ B}

Nw = {w:P ▽P ′ | w:P ▽P ′∈B}∪{ w: 12 ▽P | w: 12 ▽P ∈B}

FI 

> w

= {xw:ϕ▽P | w:ϕ▽P ∈Fw}K≤:

w:KAϕ ≤ Pw ∈ cl Ai

w′:ϕ ≤ P ; w′ ∈ cl Ai

w′ ∈ cl A′ 

> j

(A′ ∈ Agt )

K≥:

w:KAϕ ≥ Pw ∈ cl Ai u ∈ cl Ai

u:ϕ ≥ P □≤: w:[ a]ϕ ≤ PwRaw′; w′:ϕ ≤ Pw′ ∈ cl A′ 

> j

(A′ ∈ Agt )

□≥:

w:[ a]ϕ ≥ PwRauu:ϕ ≥ P

¬≤: w:¬ϕ ≤ Pw:ϕ ≥ 1 − P ¬≥: w:¬ϕ ≥ Pw:ϕ ≤ 1 − P →≤ : w:ϕ → χ ≤ PP ≥ 1

w:ϕ ≥ 1 − P + yw:χ ≤ yw:y ≤ P

→≥ : w:ϕ → χ ≥ Pw:ϕ ≤ 1 − P + yw:χ ≥ y

•: w:ϕ • χ▽Pw:ϕ = y1

w:χ = y2

w:y1 · y2▽P

→Π≤: w:ϕ →Π χ ≤ PP ≥ 1

w:ϕ = y1

w:χ = y2

w:y2/y 1 ≤ P

→Π≥: w:ϕ →Π χ ≥ Pw:ϕ ≥ yw:χ ≤ y

w:ϕ = y1

w:χ = y2

w:y2/y 1 ≥ P

Figure 1: Tableaux rules: ▽ ∈ {≤ , ≥} ; y, y1, and y2 are new variables; w′ is fresh on the branch, u is present on the branch; w:ψ = y is a shorthand for {w:ψ ≥ y, w :ψ ≤ y}; for each state generated by K≤ and □≤, we add a fresh relational term w ∈ cl A′ 

> j

for every A′ ∈ Agt 

and j ∈ N being new on the branch. 

NI 

> w

= {P ▽P ′ | w:( P ▽P ′)∈Nw}

Furthermore, we set 

F = [

> w∈WB

Fw N = [

> w∈WB

Nw BI 

> w

= FI 

> w

∪ NI

> w

FI = [

> w∈WB

FI 

> w

NI = [

> w∈WB

NI 

> w

BI = [

> w∈WB

BI

> w

A tableau branch B is called open if its corresponding system of inequalities BI has a solution over [0 , 1] and is 

closed otherwise. An open branch is complete if for every premise of a rule present on the branch, a conclusion of the rule also occurs on the branch. A tableau is closed when all its branches are closed. A formula ϕ has a T(EA ŁΠ 

> fb

)-proof 

if there is a closed tableau starting with {w:ϕ≤y, w :y< 1} ∪ {w ∈ cl A 

> 0

| A ∈ Agt } with y being a variable. 

Observe briefly that for each generated state w′ on the branch, we add terms w′ ∈ cl Ai where cl Ai is a fresh epis-temic relational label and A ∈ Agt . This works as fol-lows. E.g., we want to apply the □≤ rule to the constraint 

w:[ a]ϕ ≤ P on B. Say that Agt = {A, B }, and we al-ready have labels cl A 

> 1

and cl B 

> 1

on the branch. Then, we ex-tend B with wRaw′ and w′:ϕ ≤ P with w′ being a fresh state label. We also add relational terms w′ ∈ cl A 

> 2

and 

w′ ∈ cl B 

> 2

. This ensures that the accessibility relations EA

and EB that correspond to labels cl Ai and cl Bj are reflexive. The rule K≤ works similarly. Note that □≤ and K≤ are sound only w.r.t. finitely-branching frames because in gen-eral, inf {IM(ϕ, w ′) | wRaw′} ≤ x does not imply that there is some w′ ∈ Ra(w) s.t. IM(ϕ, w ′) ≤ x.To prove the completeness of the tableaux, we will show that every complete open branch B has a model that realises 

constraints on it. The following definition is an application of the standard notion to the semantics of EA ŁΠ 

> fb

.

Definition 14 (Realising model) . Let B be a tableau branch, BI its corresponding system of inequalities, and 

SBI a solution of BI. Given xw:ϕ occurring in FI, we use SBI (xw:ϕ) to denote its value under SBI . Let further, 

M = ⟨W, E, R, v ⟩ be an EA ŁΠ-model. M realises B un-der SBI if there is a map rl : WB → W s.t. IM(ϕ, rl (w)) = 

SBI (xw:ϕ). M is a realising model of B if there is a solution 

SBI s.t. M realises B under SBI .

The next statement can be proved in a standard manner. For soundness, we show that if M realises a premise of a rule, then M realises its conclusion. For completeness, we prove that complete open branches have realising models. 

Theorem 1. T(EA ŁΠ 

> fb

) is sound and complete w.r.t. EA ŁΠ 

> fb

:1. if ϕ has a T(EA ŁΠ 

> fb

)-proof, then it is EA ŁΠ 

> fb

-valid; 2. if ϕ is EA ŁΠ 

> fb

-valid, then it has a T(EA ŁΠ 

> fb

)-proof. 

Now, let us show that EA Pr fb -satisfiability is decidable. For this, we will define an alternative semantics of EA Pr fb 

based on sample-independent models (SI models) proposed by Kozhemiachenko and Sedlar (2025). 

Definition 15 (Sample-independent semantics) .

• An SI probabilistic frame over X (SI-frame) is a tuple F =

⟨W, E, R, X, μ ⟩ with ⟨W, E, R⟩ and X = ⟨WX, EX, RX⟩

being event frames, and μ = ⟨μw,A ⟩w∈W,A ∈Agt being a tuple of finitely additive probability measures on 2WX .

• An SI-EA Pr -model is a tuple M = ⟨W, E, R, X, μ, V ⟩ with 

⟨W, E, R, X, μ ⟩ being an SI-frame and V : Var → 2WX .Given an SI-EA Pr -model M = ⟨W, E, R, X, μ, V ⟩, we call 

X the inner frame and ⟨W, E, R⟩ the outer frame . States of inner and outer frames are called inner and outer states, re-spectively. The notions of probabilistic interpretations in-duced by M, validity, and satisfiability are adapted from Definition 6. 

From the definition above, it is clear that every ‘standard’ probabilistic model (as in Definition 4) can be treated as a sample-independent model. Thus, if ϕ ∈ LPr EA is valid on all SI-models, it is valid on all ‘standard’ probabilistic mod-els. For the converse direction, we can take an SI-model 

M = ⟨W, E, R, X, μ, V ⟩ with X = ⟨WX, EX, RX, V ⟩ s.t. 

IM(ϕ, w )<1 for some w∈W . We then define the probabi-listic model M′ = ⟨W ′, F′, E′, R′, μ ′, V ′⟩:• W ′ = W ⊎ WX;• F′ 

> w,A

= 2 W ′

for all w ∈ W ′ and A ∈ Agt ;• E′ 

> A

= EA ⊎ EAX for every A ∈ Agt ;• R′ 

> a

= Ra ⊎ RaX for every a ∈ Act ;• μ′

> w,A

({s})= μw,A ({s}) if s∈WX, μ′

> w,A

({s})=0 else; • V ′ = V

Now, we can show by induction on ϕ ∈ LPr EA that 

IM′ (ϕ, w ) = IM(ϕ, w ) for every w ∈ W . This gives us the following statement. 

Proposition 1. A formula ϕ ∈ LPr EA is EA Pr -valid iff it is valid on SI-frames. 

The idea of the sample-independent semantics is to de-couple the event model from the states over which proba-bilistic formulas are evaluated. Relying on the equivalence between sample-independent semantics and standard se-mantics, we can prove the PSPACE -completeness of the sat-isfiability of LPr EA formulas over finitely branching frames. 

Theorem 2. Given ϕ ∈ LPr EA , it is PSPACE -complete to de-cide whether it is satisfiable over finitely branching frames. Proof sketch. We begin with PSPACE -hardness. For that, we consider a polynomial reduction from the satisfiability of Levt -formulas to EA Pr fb -satisfiability. Namely, α ∈ Levt 

is satisfiable iff Pr A(α) is EA Pr fb -satisfiable. Let us now consider PSPACE -membership. Our proof combines the ideas of (Fagin and Halpern 1994) and (Hájek and Tulipani 2001). First of all, we note that all tableaux terminate: all rules have the branching factor of at most 2

and decompose formulas into their subformulas. Now, we proceed as follows. Using a standard tableaux procedure akin to the one by Blackburn et al. (2010), we be-gin to construct the frame ⟨W, E, R⟩ by building a tableau for {w0:ϕ≥1}. Note from Remark 1 that the tableaux rules are sound for EA Pr fb . We apply the rules depth-first until we generate a state w s.t. no labelled formula w:ψ contains an outer-layer modality. Then, we decompose formulas la-belled with w and construct a system of polynomial inequal-ities BI 

> w

(cf. Definition 13). Now, for each A ∈ Agt on B, we construct two sets 

At A(w) = {α | w:Pr A(α)▽P ∈ B}

SF ∼ 

> A

(w) = {β | ∃ α ∈ At A(w) : β is a subformula of α}∪ {¬ β | ∃ α ∈ At A(w) : β is a subformula of α}

We then consider the following event model: 

Xw,A = ⟨W SF , ESF , RSF , V SF ⟩

The states of Xw,A correspond to the maximal consistent subsets of SF ∼ 

> A

(w), the relations are defined as follows: 

RSF  

> a

(Ξ , Ξ′) iff ∀β ∈ SF ∼ 

> A

(w) : [ a]β ∈ Ξ ⇒ β ∈ Ξ′

ESF  

> A

(Ξ , Ξ′) iff ∀β ∈ SF ∼ 

> A

(w) : KAβ ∈ Ξ ⇔ KAβ ∈ Ξ′

and V SF (p) = {Ξ | p ∈ Ξ} for all p ∈ Var (ϕ). Xw,A has exponential size, but for any Ξ ⊆ SF ∼ 

> A

(w), one can check whether Ξ ∈ W SF using polynomial space since event for-mulas contain only S5 and K modalities. Moreover, one can show as in (Fagin and Halpern 1994, Theorem 4.1) that for every β ∈ SF ∼ 

> A

(w) and Ξ ∈ W SF , we have Xw,A , Ξ ⊨ β

iff β ∈ Ξ.We now need to ensure that the values of Pr A(α)’s at w

are coherent with a measure on Xw,A , i.e., that there is some measure μw,A s.t. μw,A (∥α∥Xw,A ) = Pr A(α) for all α ∈

At A(w). We add fresh variables yAα for every α ∈ At A(w)

and uA 

> Ξ

for every Ξ ⊆ SF ∼ 

> A

(w). Here, y’s are auxiliary vari-ables that will stand for the values of Pr A(α)’s at w, and 

u’s are the values of μw,A ({Ξ})’s (i.e., we encode the prob-ability distribution induced by μw,A ). Furthermore, we set 

aΞ,α = 1 if α ∈ Ξ and aΞ,α = 0 , otherwise. Now, we consider the following system of linear equations: 

X   

> Ξ⊆SF ∼
> A(w)

uA 

> Ξ

= 1 

∪ (big Aw )

X   

> Ξ⊆SF ∼
> A(w)

(aΞ,α · uA 

> Ξ

) = yAα α ∈ At A(w)



In this system, the top equation ensures that the measures of all states in Xw,A add up to 1, and the bottom equations guar-antee that Pr A(α)’s are obtained as the sums of measures of states where α’s are true. Moreover, we note that it takes linear time w.r.t. l(ϕ) to determine the value of a given a

and that ( big Aw ) contains |At A(w)| + 1 equations. Thus, ap-plying (Chvátal 1983, Theorem 9.3), we can guess a list L

containing |At A(w)| + 1 variables uA 

> Ξ

s.t. Ξ’s are maximal consistent sets and for every α ∈ At A(w), there is some Ξ

s.t. α ∈ Ξ. Then we set uA 

> Ξ

= 0 for every uA 

> Ξ

/∈ L. This gives us the following system of equations whose size is polyno-mial w.r.t. At A(w): X  

> uA
> Ξ∈L

uA 

> Ξ

= 1 

∪ (small Aw )

X  

> uA
> Ξ∈L

(aΞ,α · uA 

> Ξ

) = yAα α ∈ At A(w)



We repeat this process, obtaining ( small Aw )’s for every A ∈

Agt . Then, we consider the following system of polynomial inequalities: 

Sw = BI 

> w

∪ [

> A∈Agt

(small Aw ) ∪ [

> α∈At A(w)
> A∈Agt

yAα = xw:Pr A(α)

Note that the size of Sw is polynomial in l(ϕ). Thus, it takes polynomial space to determine whether Sw has solutions. If it does not , then we close B, and pick the next branch. If 

it does , we mark the constraint that generated w (say, w′ :[a]ψ ≤ P ) as ‘safe’, delete w′Raw, Sw, and all formulas labelled with w from B. We then pick another formulaic constraint of the form w′ : ■ψ ≤ P ′ and repeat the process. Once all constraints of the form w′ : ■ψ ≤ P ′ are ‘safe’, we mark w′ as ‘safe’. We proceed like this until w0 is marked ‘safe’ (in which case, ϕ is EA Pr fb -satisfiable) or all branches of the tableau are closed (i.e., ϕ is unsatisfiable). We finish the section with a brief remark. 

Remark 2. Recall from (Hájek 2005, Lemma 3) and (Vidal 2022, Lemma 4.6) that modal Łukasiewicz logic has the wit-nessed model property . A witnessed model is a model M

where IM([ a]ϕ, w ) = x (or IM(KAϕ′, w ′) = x′, respec-tively) implies the existence of s ∈ Ra(w) (s′ ∈ EA(w)) s.t. 

IM(ϕ, s ) = x (IM(ϕ′, s ′) = x′). In particular, this, to-gether with Remark 1, means that the tableaux rules (Fig. 1) are sound w.r.t. {• , →Π}-free LPr EA formulas. Moreover, it follows that a {• , →Π}-free ϕ ∈ LPr EA is EA Pr fb -satisfiable iff it is EA Pr -satisfiable. Thus, witnessed model property im-plies finite model property .Thus, the next statement follows. 

Theorem 3. Given a {• , →Π}-free ϕ ∈ LPr EA , it is PSPACE -complete to determine whether it is EA Pr -satisfiable. 

# 5 Polynomial Fragments of EA Pr 

As is well-known, classical logic has many polynomially de-cidable fragments. One of the most important such frag-ments is Horn logic . A Horn theory can be represented as a set of rules of two kinds: Vni=1 pi→q and Vni=1 pi→⊥ .In Łukasiewicz logic, there is a similar polynomially decid-able fragment studied by Bofill et al. (2019). It is called 

simple-clause fragment : a simple clause theory is a theory that contains clauses of the form Lmi=1 pi ⊕ Lnj=1 ¬qj . Us-ing Definition 6 and Convention 1, simple clauses can also be represented in the rule form. In this section, we will consider two modal probabilistic expansions of the simple clause fragment. The difference is that instead of propositional literals, our clauses (rules) will be built over uniform probabilistic literals .

Definition 16 (Uniform modal literals ( UML ’s)) . Consider the following grammar that defines a fragment of Levt :

π := p | ¬ p | ⟨ a⟩π | bKAπν := p | ¬ p | [a]ν | KAν

Formulas of the type π and ν are called ♦-literals and ■-literals , respectively. A literal is proper if it contains at least one modality and propositional otherwise. 

Definition 17 (Uniform probabilistic literals ( UPL ’s)) . Con-sider the following grammar ( λ is a ¬-free UML ): 

ζ := Pr A(λ) | ¬ Pr A(λ) | ⟨ a⟩ζ | bKAζη := Pr A(λ) | ¬ Pr A(λ) | [a]η | KAη

Formulas of the type ζ and η are called ♦Pr -literals and ■Pr -literals , respectively. A literal is proper if it contains at least one modality on the outer layer and propositional otherwise. 

Observe that all modal events from Example 1 are ex-pressed via UML ’s and can occur in UPL ’s. Furthermore, it is important to note that ■Pr -literals can contain ♦, and 

♦Pr -literals can contain ■ on the inner layer. Moreover, the fragments of LPr EA that we are considering in this section will not use connectives • and →Π. Thus, again (cf. Remark 2), by (Hájek 2005, Lemma 3) and (Vidal 2022, Lemma 4.6), it follows that their EA Pr -satisfiability can be w.l.o.g. estab-lished w.r.t. witnessed models and using rules from Fig. 1. 

5.1 Universal Probabilistic Rules 

Let us now define our first fragment — universal probabilis-tic rules . As the name suggests, we can only use box-like modalities on the outer layer. Note, however, that inner for-mulas can use both types of modalities. 

Definition 18 (Universal probabilistic rules) . A universal probabilistic rule (UPR ) is 

• either a formula of the form Jni=1 ηi → η′ s.t. η’s are 

proper ■Pr -literals; 

• or a formula of the form Jni=1 ηi → 0 s.t. η’s are ■Pr -literals. A UPR theory is a set of formulas containing UPR ’s. 

For simplicity, we will write rules η → 0 as ♦Pr -literals. E.g., ⟨a⟩¬ Pr A(p) instead of [a]Pr A(p) → 0.Let us briefly illustrate the expressiveness of universal probabilistic rules. We recall several statements consid-ered in Section 3. One can see we can compare two probabilities: Pr A([ a]p) → Pr A([ b]p) is a UPR . We can also express that performing a does not increase the probability with [a]Pr ob (KAp) → Pr ob (KAp). Moreover,  

> 12

→ Pr ob (KAp) can be rewritten as follows: {Pr ob (q) →¬Pr ob (q), ¬Pr ob (q) → Pr ob (q), Pr ob (q) → Pr ob (KAp)}.On the other hand, we cannot express that an action does not decrease a given probability: Pr ob ([ a]p) →

[b]Pr ob ([ a]p) is not a UPR since Pr ob ([ a]p) is not a proper ■Pr -literal. Likewise, qualitative uncertainty — 

KAPr ob (p) ↔ bKAPr ob (p) — is not expressible as a UPR .Furthermore, crisp statements with △ rational constants other than 12 (cf. Examples 2 and 3) are not expressible ei-ther. On the other hand, all formulas in Example 4 belong to the UPR fragment. The next statement establishes the polynomial decidabil-ity of UPR theories. Observe from Remark 2 that since UPR 

theories do not contain • and →Π, our decidability result holds for all probabilistic models. 

Theorem 4. Given a UPR theory Γ, it takes polynomial time to verify whether it is EA Pr -satisfiable. 

Let us sketch the proof. We first show that it takes poly-nomial time to decide whether a set of UPL ’s is satisfiable. Then, we consider irreducible theories , i.e., UPR theories 

Γ = Θ ∪ Ξ where Θ is a set of UPL ’s and Ξ is a set of UPR ’s with at least two literals each s.t. Ξ does not contain any lit-eral θ s.t. Θ |=EA Pr ¬θ. We show that it takes polynomial time to verify whether a given UPR theory is irreducible. We then prove that every irreducible theory is EA Pr -satisfiable. First, note that Θ is satisfiable. Second, we pick one proper ■Pr -literal from the left-hand side of each rule in Ξ (that contains proper ■Pr -literals) and show that there is a pointed probabilistic model ⟨M, w ⟩ s.t. IM(θ, w ) = 1 for all θ ∈ Θ, and every literal we picked has value 0. Third, we show that the propositional literals in the rules that are not satisfied by that model can be evaluated at 12 in w (whence all rules without proper ■Pr -literals have value 1 at w). This guarantees us that every formula in Γ has value 1 at w.Let us now sketch a polynomial decision procedure for 

UPR theories. First, we transform the theory into the clause form, using that IM(ϕ → χ, w ) = IM(¬ϕ ⊕ χ, w ) in each probabilistic model M. Second, we apply the following rule: if Θ |=EA Pr ¬θ, then Θ, θ ⊕ κ |=EA Pr κ

Using this rule, we need polynomial time to either trans-form Γ into an irreducible theory or infer a literal θ′ s.t. 

Θ′, θ ′ |=EA Pr 0 with Θ′ being (possibly) augmented with other UPL ’s inferred via the above transformation. In the first case, Γ is EA Pr -satisfiable, and in the second, it is not. 

5.2 Existential Probabilistic Rules 

Our second fragment is existential probabilistic rules. One can think of them as a probabilistic version of the Łukasiewicz description logic EL ⊥ (cf., e.g., (Baader et al. 2017, Ch. 6) for a presentation of classical EL ⊥). The main difference, of course, is that we will consider the complex-ity of local satisfiability (whether a formula is true in some state of a model) of theories containing existential proba-bilistic rules. This is because global satifiability (whether a formula is true in all states of a model) of Łukasiewicz 

EL ⊥ is undecidable (Baader and Peñaloza 2011; Cerami and Straccia 2013; Borgwardt, Cerami, and Peñaloza 2015; Borgwardt, Cerami, and Peñaloza 2017; Baader, Borgwardt, and Peñaloza 2017; Bobillo and Straccia 2018). 

Definition 19. An existential positive probabilistic rule 

(EPR +) is a formula of one of the following kinds: 

• a UPL ;

• Jni=1 ζi→0 with ζ’s being propositional literals or ¬-free 

♦Pr -literals; 

• Jni=1 ζi → ζ with ζ’s being proper ¬-free ♦Pr -literals. 

There is also a syntactic difference between EPR + and 

EL ⊥. Namely, we can freely use negation over proposi-tional atoms. E.g., a rule ¬Pr A([ a]p)⊙¬ Pr B (KAKB q)→0

is allowed, despite the negation in the left-hand side. On the other hand, EPR +’s and UPR ’s are not completely dual. In particular, in contrast to UPR theories, we cannot use negation in ♦Pr -literals when they occur in implications. Thus, existential rules such as ⟨a⟩¬ Pr A(p) → bKAPr B (q)

are not allowed (while [a]¬Pr A(p) → KAPr B (q) is a UPR ). Hence, no formula from Examples 2–4, except 

Pr A([ m]B folds ) → Pr A([ a]B folds ), belongs to the 

EPR + fragment. The next statement shows that EA Pr -satisfiability of 

EPR + theories is also decidable in polynomial time. The proof is similar to that of Theorem 4. 

Theorem 5. Given an EPR + theory Γ, it takes polynomial time to verify whether it is EA Pr -satisfiable. 

We conclude the section with a short sketch of the proof. Observe first from Theorem 4 that it takes polynomial time to check the EA Pr -satisfiability of a given set of UPL ’s or whether an UPL is entailed from a set of UPL ’s. Now, as was the case in Theorem 4, it remains to show that irreducible EPR + theories are EA Pr -satisfiable. The difference is that instead of picking ■Pr -literals from each rule and assigning them value 0 at w, we show that there is a pointed probabilistic model ⟨M, w ⟩ where one proper ♦Pr -literal from the left-hand side of each rule has value 0 at w.Thus, given an EPR + theory, we can use the same procedure as in Theorem 4 to either transform it into an irreducible (and hence, satisfiable) theory or infer a contradiction. 

# 6 Related Work 

As we mentioned in the introduction, the first family of log-ics that combined modal (epistemic) and probabilistic rea-soning was proposed by Fagin and Halpern (1994). There are several important differences between their logic and ours. First, probabilistic formulas in (Fagin and Halpern 1994) are expressed via linear inequalities that are two-valued , and thus, are not well suited to express imprecise statements such as ‘the probability of α is not much lower (higher) than the probability of β’. Second, the expressiv-ity of the modal probabilistic language proposed by Fagin and Halpern is incomparable with that of LPr EA . On the one hand, there are no separate inner and outer formulas. Thus, e.g., the following formula (adapted to the notation in this paper) is permitted: (Pr B (KA(Pr A(a)≥ 23 )) ≤ 12 )→KB q.On the other hand, inequality formulas can contain only one agent label. Thus, statements such as ‘ A and B con-sider α equally likely’ ( △(Pr A(α)↔Pr B (α)) in LPr EA ) can-not be expressed, unless one specifies the degree of likeli-hood. Furthermore, the validity of some probabilistic log-ics is EXPTIME -complete (Fagin and Halpern 1994, The-orem 4.5). Observe, however, that all logics in (Fagin and Halpern 1994) have the finite model property, while in our case, this holds only for the {• , →Π}-free fragment of LPr EA 

(recall Remark 2). Our work, however, continues the study of fuzzy modal probabilistic logics. In particular, we expand the fuzzy epis-temic probabilistic logic proposed by Corsi et al. (2023) with 

action modalities as well as with additional connectives •

and →Π. These allow us to express (subjective) conditional probability of α given β via Pr A(β) →Π Pr A(α ∧ β) as well as degrees of independence of α and β: Pr A(α ∧ β) ↔

(Pr (α) • Pr (β)) . Moreover, Corsi et al. study the axiomati-sation and expressivity of their epistemic probabilistic logic, while we are concentrating on complexity. We also note that the logic in (Corsi et al. 2023) is the fragment of EA Pr with-out •, →Π, and action modalities. Another closely related work is by Majer and Sedlár (2025) and Kozhemiachenko and Sedlár (2025). There, a logic KŁ Π 12 

> Pr

with action modalities and propo-sitional event formulas is considered. Note, however, that even though EA Pr is more expressive than KŁ Π 12

> Pr

, the satisfiability problem in both logics is PSPACE -complete. Thus, in this paper, we combined the frameworks of (Corsi et al. 2023) and (Kozhemiachenko and Sedlár 2025), by proposing a logic with both epistemic and action modalities on its outer and inner layers. Finally, we note that to the best of our knowledge, there are no results on the complexity (and decidability) of Łukasiewicz modal logic extended with △ over arbitrary frames (this logic fails the FMP as we observed in the end of Section 3), let alone of the modal logic over ŁΠ (combined Łukasiewicz and Product modal logic). Thus, there are no results on the decidability of their probabilistic expansions. Still, there is an interesting pattern: usually, the complexity of a two-layered logic built over logics L1 and L2 coincides with that of the harder logic. E.g., FP (ŁΠ) by Hajek and Tulipani (2001) uses events expressed as Boolean formulas and is in PSPACE , just as the propositional ŁΠ. Likewise, the satisfiability of arbitrary probabilistic atoms Pr A(α) is 

PSPACE -hard because (classical) modal logic is PSPACE -hard. Thus, we conjecture that the complexity of EA Pr (over arbitrary frames) will coincide with that of EA ŁΠ.

# 7 Conclusion and Future Work 

We introduced and studied EA Pr , a modal probabilistic logic that unifies and expands the frameworks of Corsi et al. (2023) on one hand and Majer and Sedlár (2025) and Kozhemiachenko and Sedlár (2025), on the other hand. A distinguishing feature of our framework is the presence of epistemic and action modalities in both logical layers. We showed that EA Pr can express probabilistic statements about modal events involving knowledge or the effects of actions and lower and upper probabilities of events arising from epistemic uncertainty or from uncertainty about out-comes of actions. Such specifications are important in do-mains such as robotics and cybersecurity. We established that the satisfiability problem for the full language over finitely-branching frames is PSPACE -complete. We also identified specific syntactic fragments for which validity is decidable in polynomial time. There are several promising avenues for future research. A primary objective is to provide a sound and complete ax-iomatisation for EA Pr . To enrich the framework and improve its applicability to reasoning about programs and multi-agent systems, we also intend to extend the current language to incorporate Propositional Dynamic Logic constructs and operators for group knowledge. Finally, we plan to explore the semantic boundaries and other computational aspects of the logic. Our current com-plexity results in Section 4 for the full LPr EA rely on a restric-tion to finitely branching frames. Investigating the complex-ity of the logic without this constraint is a necessary step towards generalising the framework. We also intend to ex-pand the scope of uncertainty representation by incorporat-ing fuzzy events and exploring other uncertainty measures alongside their qualitative counterparts. Identifying addi-tional polynomially-decidable fragments of EA Pr remains a priority for practical implementation. 

# Acknowledgements 

Igor Sedlár was supported by the grant 22-16111S of the Czech Science Foundation. The authors would also like to thank the reviewers for their constructive suggestions that improved the quality of the paper. 

# AI Declaration 

The authors used Google Gemini to obtain feedback on the formulations of Examples in Section 3. 

# References 

Akkaladevi, S. C.; Plasch, M.; Hofmann, M.; and Pichler, A. 2021. Semantic knowledge based reasoning framework for human robot collaboration. Procedia CIRP 97:373–378. Baader, F., and Peñaloza, R. 2011. On the undecidability of fuzzy description logics with GCIs and product t-norm. In Tinelli, C., and Sofronie-Stokkermans, V., eds., Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Frontiers of Combin-ing Systems (FroCoS-11) , volume 6989 of Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence , 55–70. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag. Baader, F.; Horrocks, I.; Lutz, C.; and Sattler, U. 2017. An Introduction to Description Logic . Cambridge University Press. Baader, F.; Borgwardt, S.; and Peñaloza, R. 2017. Decid-ability and Complexity of Fuzzy Description Logics. Kün-stliche Intelligenz 31(1):85–90. Bacchus, F.; Halpern, J. Y.; and Levesque, H. J. 1999. Rea-soning about noisy sensors and effectors in the situation cal-culus. Artificial Intelligence 111(1–2):171–208. Bach, S. H.; Broecheler, M.; Huang, B.; and Getoor, L. 2017. Hinge-loss markov random fields and probabilis-tic soft logic. Journal of Machine Learning Research 

18(109):1–67. Badreddine, S.; Avila Garcez, A. d.; Serafini, L.; and Spranger, M. 2022. Logic tensor networks. Artificial In-telligence 303(103649):103649. Baldi, P.; Cintula, P.; and Noguera, C. 2020. Classical and Fuzzy Two-Layered Modal Logics for Uncertainty: Trans-lations and Proof-Theory. International Journal of Compu-tational Intelligence Systems 13:988–1001. Barthe, G.; Köpf, B.; Olmedo, F.; and Zanella-Béguelin, S. 2013. Probabilistic relational reasoning for differential pri-vacy. ACM Transactions on Programming Languages and Systems 35(3):1–49. Blackburn, P.; Rijke, M. d.; and Venema, Y. 2010. Modal logic . Cambridge tracts in theoretical computer science 53. Cambridge University Press, 4. print. with corr. edition. Bobillo, F., and Straccia, U. 2018. Reasoning within Fuzzy OWL 2 EL Revisited. Fuzzy Sets and Systems 351:1–40. Bobillo, F.; Delgado, M.; Gómez-Romero, J.; and Straccia, U. 2009. Fuzzy description logics under Gödel semantics. 

International Journal of Approximate Reasoning 50(3):494– 514. Bobillo, F.; Delgado, M.; Gómez-Romero, J.; and Straccia, U. 2012. Joining Gödel and Zadeh fuzzy logics in fuzzy de-scription logics. International Journal of Uncertainty Fuzzi-ness and Knowledge-Based Systems 20(04):475–508. Bofill, M.; Manyà, F.; Vidal, A.; and Villaret, M. 2019. New Complexity Results for Łukasiewicz Logic. Soft Computing 

23(7):2187–2197. Borgwardt, S.; Cerami, M.; and Peñaloza, R. 2015. The Complexity of Subsumption in Fuzzy EL. In Yang, Q., and Wooldridge, M. J., eds., Proceedings of the Twenty-Fourth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, IJ-CAI 2015 , 2812–2818. AAAI Press. Borgwardt, S.; Cerami, M.; and Peñaloza, R. 2017. The complexity of fuzzy EL under the łukasiewicz t-norm. In-ternational Journal of Approximate Reasoning 91:179–201. Borgwardt, S.; Distel, F.; and Peñaloza, R. 2014a. De-cidable Gödel description logics without the finitely-valued model property. In Fourteenth International Conference on the Principles of Knowledge Representation and Reasoning ,228–237. Borgwardt, S.; Distel, F.; and Peñaloza, R. 2014b. Gödel description logics with general models. In DL 2014: In-formal Proceedings of the 27th International Workshop on Description Logics , volume 1193, 391–403. CEUR. Brown, N., and Sandholm, T. 2019. Superhuman AI for multiplayer poker. Science 365(6456):885–890. Cerami, M., and Straccia, U. 2013. On the (Un)Decidability of Fuzzy Description Logics under Lukasiewicz t-Norm. In-formation Sciences 227:1–21. Chen, X.; Hu, Z.; and Sun, Y. 2022. Fuzzy logic based log-ical query answering on knowledge graphs. In Proceedings of the 36th AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , vol-ume 36, 3939–3948. Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (AAAI). Chvátal, V. 1983. Linear programming . W.H. Freeman and Company. Corsi, E.; Flaminio, T.; Godo, L.; and Hosni, H. 2023. A modal logic for uncertainty: a completeness theorem. In Miranda, E.; Montes, I.; Quaeghebeur, E.; and Vantaggi, B., eds., Proceedings of the Thirteenth International Sympo-sium on Imprecise Probability: Theories and Applications ,volume 215 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research ,119–129. PMLR. Diligenti, M.; Gori, M.; and Saccà, C. 2017. Semantic-based regularization for learning and inference. Artificial Intelligence 244:143–165. Doder, D., and Ognjanovic, Z. 2024. Probabilistic temporal logic with countably additive semantics. Annals of Pure and Applied Logic 175(9):103389. Doder, D., and Perovi´ c, A. 2020. Probabilistic temporal logics. In Ognjanovi´ c, Z., ed., Probabilistic Extensions of Various Logical Systems . Springer International Publishing. 71–108. Doder, D.; Savic, N.; and Ognjanovic, Z. 2020. Multi-agent Logics for Reasoning About Higher-Order Upper and Lower Probabilities. Journal of Logic, Language and Information 

29(1):77–107. Esteva, F.; Godo, L.; and Montagna, F. 2001. The 

LΠ and LΠ 12 logics: two complete fuzzy systems joining Łukasiewicz and product logics. Archive for Mathematical Logic 40(1):39–67. Fagin, R., and Halpern, J. 1994. Reasoning about knowledge and probability. Journal of the ACM 41(2):340–367. Fagin, R.; Halpern, J.; and Megiddo, N. 1990. A logic for reasoning about probabilities. Information and computation 

87(1–2):78–128. Fazzinga, B.; Flesca, S.; and Parisi, F. 2015. On the com-plexity of probabilistic abstract argumentation frameworks. 

ACM Transactions on Computational Logic 16(3). Godo, L.; Hájek, P.; and Esteva, F. 2003. A fuzzy modal logic for belief functions. Fundamenta Informaticae 57(2– 4):127–146. Hähnle, R. 1999. Tableaux for Many-Valued Logics. In Agostino, M. D.; Gabbay, D. M.; Hähnle, R.; and Posegga, J., eds., Handbook of Tableaux Methods , 529–580. Springer-Science+Business Media, B.V. Hájek, P., and Tulipani, S. 2001. Complexity of fuzzy prob-ability logics. Fundamenta Informaticae 45(3):207–213. Hájek, P.; Godo, L.; and Esteva, F. 1995. Fuzzy logic and probability. In Besnard, P., and Hanks, S., eds., UAI’95: Proceedings of the Eleventh Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence , 237–244. San Francisco: Morgan Kaufmann. Hájek, P.; Godo, L.; and Esteva, F. 2000. Reasoning about probability using fuzzy logic. Neural Network World 

10(5):811–824. Hájek, P. 1998. Metamathematics of Fuzzy Logic . Trends in Logic 4. Dordrecht: Springer. Hájek, P. 2005. Making fuzzy description logic more gen-eral. Fuzzy Sets and Systems 154(1):1–15. Hájek, P. 2007. On witnessed models in fuzzy logic. Math-ematical Logic Quarterly 53(1):66–77. Halpern, J. Y., and O’Neill, K. R. 2005. Anonymity and information hiding in multiagent systems. Journal of Com-puter Security 13(3):483–514. Halpern, J. Y., and Pucella, R. 2002. A logic for reasoning about upper probabilities. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research 17:57–81. He, M.; Leung, H.; and Jennings, N. R. 2003. A Fuzzy-Logic Based Bidding Strategy for Autonomous Agents in Continuous Double Auctions. IEEE Transactions on Knowl-edge and Data Engineering 15(6):1345–1363. Hájek, P., and Harmancová, D. 1995. Medical fuzzy expert systems and reasoning about beliefs. In Artificial Intelli-gence in Medicine. AIME 1995 , 403–404. Springer Berlin Heidelberg. Kozhemiachenko, D., and Sedlár, I. 2026. Reasoning About Probabilities, Actions, and Knowledge in Fuzzy Modal Logic. Available at arXiv: XXX. Kozhemiachenko, D., and Sedlár, I. 2025. Complexity of Łukasiewicz modal probabilistic logics. In Bjorndahl, A., ed., Proceedings Twentieth Conference on Theoretical As-pects of Rationality and Knowledge , volume 437 of Elec-tronic Proceedings in Theoretical Computer Science , 350– 364. Krieken, E. v.; Acar, E.; and Harmelen, F. v. 2022. Ana-lyzing differentiable fuzzy logic operators. Artificial Intelli-gence 302(103602):103602. Li, H.; Oren, N.; and Norman, T. J. 2012. Probabilistic argumentation frameworks. In Theorie and Applications of Formal Argumentation , Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg. 1–16. Lukasiewicz, T. 1998. Probabilistic logic programming. In Prade, H., ed., 13th European Conference on Artificial Intelligence , 388–392. John Wiley and Sons. Lukasiewicz, T. 2008. Expressive probabilistic description logics. Artificial Intelligence 172(6–7):852–883. Majer, O., and Sedlár, I. 2025. On Many-Valued Modal Probabilistic Logics. In 55th IEEE International Symposium on Multiple-Valued Logic, ISMVL 2025 , 26–31. IEEE. Marchioni, E. 2008. Representing Upper Probability Mea-sures over Rational Łukasiewicz Logic. Mathware and Soft Computing 15(2):159–173. Ng, R., and Subrahmanian, V. S. 1992. Probabilistic logic programming. Information and Computation 101(2):150– 201. Nilsson, N. J. 1986. Probabilistic logic. Artificial Intelli-gence 28(1):71–87. Ognjanovic, Z.; Markovic, Z.; Raskovic, M.; Doder, D.; and Perovic, A. 2012. A propositional probabilistic logic with discrete linear time for reasoning about evidence. Annals of Mathematics and Artificial Intelligence 65(2-3):217–243. Peñaloza, R. 2020. Introduction to probabilistic ontolo-gies. In Reasoning Web. Declarative Artificial Intelligence ,Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Cham: Springer Inter-national Publishing. 1–35. Riguzzi, F., and Swift, T. 2018. A survey of probabilis-tic logic programming. In Declarative Logic Programming: Theory, Systems, and Applications . ACM. 185–228. Thrun, S.; Burgard, W.; and Fox, D. 2005. Probabilistic Robotics . MIT Press. Tomovic, S.; Ognjanovic, Z.; and Doder, D. 2020. A First-order Logic for Reasoning about Knowledge and Probabil-ity. ACM Trans. Comput. Log. 21(2):16:1–16:30. Vidal, A. 2022. Undecidability and non-axiomatizability of modal many-valued logics. The Journal of Symbolic Logic 

87(4):1576–1605. Zadeh, L. A. 1965. Fuzzy sets. Information and Control 

8(3):338–353. Zadeh, L. A. 1975. Fuzzy logic and approximate reasoning. 

Synthese 30(3-4):407–428. A Proofs of Section 4 

Theorem 1. T(EA ŁΠ 

> fb

) is sound and complete w.r.t. EA ŁΠ 

> fb

:1. if ϕ has a T(EA ŁΠ 

> fb

)-proof, then it is EA ŁΠ 

> fb

-valid; 2. if ϕ is EA ŁΠ 

> fb

-valid, then it has a T(EA ŁΠ 

> fb

)-proof. Proof. The proof is standard, so we provide only a sketch. For the soundness part, we observe first that closed branches do not have realising models. Indeed, if B is closed, then BI

has no solutions, whence B cannot have a realising model. Now, it suffices to show that if M realises the premises of a rule, it also realises the conclusion. For propositional rules, this follows straightforwardly from Definition 6. Let us now consider the 

□≤ rule as an example. Assume that M realises w : [ a]χ ≤ P . Then IM([ a]χ, w ) ≤ P and there must be some w′ ∈ Ra(w)

s.t. IM(χ, w ′) ≤ P . Hence, the conclusion is also realised. Rules □≥, K≤, and K≥ can be dealt with similarly. Let us now consider the completeness. It suffices to show that every complete open branch B has a realising model. Let SBI

be a solution of the system of inequalities BI that corresponds to B. We construct the model M = ⟨W, E, R, v ⟩ as follows: 

W = {w | w occurs on B}

Ra = {⟨ w, w ′⟩ | wRaw′ ∈ B} (for every a ∈ Act )

EA = {⟨ w, w ′⟩ | ∃ cl A : w ∈ cl A and w′ ∈ cl A occur on B} (for every A ∈ Agt )

v(p, w ) = SBI (xw:p)

It remains to show that IM(χ, w ) = SBI (xw:χ) for every χ occurring on B.We proceed by induction on χ. The base case of χ ∈ Var holds by construction of M. The propositional cases can be verified by a straightforward application of the induction hypothesis. Let us now consider the case of χ = [ a]ψ. Assume that 

w:[ a]ψ ≤ P ∈ B. As B is complete, {wRw ′, w ′:ψ ≤ P } ⊆ B. By the induction hypothesis, M realises w′:ψ ≤ P . Thus, there is w′ ∈ Ra(w) s.t. IM(ψ, w ′) ≤ P . It follows that IM([ a]ψ, w ) ≤ P , as required. Now assume that w:[ a]ψ ≥ P ∈ B.If there is no u s.t. wRau ∈ B, it means that Ra(w) = ∅, whence IM([ a]ψ, w ) = 1 . Thus, w:[ a]ψ ≥ P is realised. If there is some u s.t. wRau ∈ B, then for each such u, u:ψ ≥ P ∈ B. Again, by the induction hypothesis, all these constraints are realised, whence IM([ a]ψ, w ) ≤ P , as required. The case of χ = KAψ can be dealt with in a similar manner. 

Proposition 1. A formula ϕ ∈ LPr EA is EA Pr -valid iff it is valid on SI-frames. Proof. It is clear that if ϕ is valid on SI-models, then it is valid on standard models. For the converse direction, let ϕ be not valid on SI-models. Then IM(ϕ, w ) < 1 for some SI-model M = ⟨W, E, R, X, μ, V ⟩ with X = ⟨WX, EX, RX, V ⟩. We define 

M′ = ⟨W ′, F′, E′, R′, μ ′, V ′⟩:• W ′ = W ⊎ WX;• F′ 

> w,A

= 2 W ′

for all w ∈ W ′ and A ∈ Agt ;• E′ 

> A

= EA ⊎ EAX for every A ∈ Agt ;• R′ 

> a

= Ra ⊎ RaX for every a ∈ Act ;• μ′

> w,A

({s}) = 

μw,A ({s}) if s ∈ WX

0 otherwise ;• V ′ = V

Observe now that for every α ∈ Levt , A ∈ Agt , and w ∈ W , μw,A (∥α∥M) = μ′

> w,A

(∥α∥M′ ). Let us now show by induction of ϕ ∈ LPr EA that IM(ϕ, w ) = IM′ (ϕ, w ) for every w ∈ W .Let ϕ = Pr A(α) with α ∈ Levt . Observe that epistemic and action relations in M′ are disjoint unions of those in ⟨W, E, R⟩

and ⟨WX, EX, RX⟩ and V ′ = V . Thus, we have that s ∈ ∥ α∥M′ ∩ WX iff s ∈ ∥ α∥X for every α ∈ Levt . Furthermore, the only states in M′ that can have a positive measure are exactly the states that were in WX. It now follows that μ′

> w,A

(∥α∥M′ ) = 

μw,A (∥α∥X). The basis case now follows. The cases of propositional connectives {¬ , →, •, →Π} follow by a straightforward application of the induction hypothesis. Let us now consider the case of ϕ = KAχ. Observe from the construction of M′ that {t | sE′

> A

t} = {t | sEAt} for every s ∈ W

and A ∈ Agt . By the induction hypothesis, we have that IM′ (χ, w ′) = IM(χ, w ′) for every w′ s.t. wE′

> A

w′. It follows that 

IM′ (KAχ, w ) = IM(KAχ, w ). The case of ϕ = [ a]χ can be dealt with in a similar manner. Before proceeding to the proof of Theorem 2, we introduce several technical notions. 

Definition 20. Given α ∈ Levt , we say that: 

• α is EA -satisfiable iff there is an event model E and w ∈ E s.t. E, w ⊨ α;

• α is EA -valid iff for every event model E and every w ∈ E, it holds that E, w ⊨ α.Given Γ ⊆ Levt , we will say that it is EA -satisfiable iff there is an event model E and w ∈ E s.t. E, w ⊨ γ for all γ ∈ Γ.Definition 21 (Maximal consistent sets) . Let Γ ⊆ Levt be closed under negated subformulas, i.e., satisfy the following property: 

∀α : ( ∃β : α is a subformula of β & β ∈ Γ) ⇒ α ∈ Γ or ¬α ∈ Γ

A maximal consistent subset of Γ (Γ-MCS) is a set Ξ that satisfies the following property: 

∀α ∈ Γ : α ∈ Ξ ⇔ Ξ ∪ { α} is EA -satisfiable 

Definition 22. Let Γ ⊆ Levt be closed under negated subformulas. An MCS event model for Γ is the following structure 

EΓ = ⟨W Γ, EΓ, RΓ, V Γ⟩:

W Γ = {Ξ ⊆ Γ | Ξ is a Γ-MCS }

EΓ 

> A

= {⟨ ∆, Θ⟩ | ∀ KAα ∈ Γ : KAα ∈ ∆ ⇔ KAα ∈ Θ} (A ∈ Agt )

RΓ 

> a

= {⟨ ∆, Θ⟩ | ∀ [a]α ∈ Γ : [ a]α ∈ ∆ ⇒ α ∈ Θ} (a ∈ Act )

V Γ(p) = {Ξ ∈ W Γ | p ∈ Ξ}

Lemma 1. For every Γ̸ = ∅ that is closed under negated subformulas, EΓ is an event model. Proof. We note briefly that W Γ̸ = ∅ and that EΓ

> A

’s are equivalence relations in Γ as one can see from Definition 22. The statement now follows. The next statement can now be shown by induction on α ∈ Levt same as (Fagin and Halpern 1994, Theorem 4.1). 

Lemma 2. Let Γ ⊆ Levt be closed under negated subformulas and EΓ = ⟨W Γ, EΓ, RΓ, V Γ⟩ be an MCS event model for Γ.Then the following holds: 

∀ϕ ∈ Γ, Ξ is a Γ-MCS : ϕ ∈ Ξ ⇔ EΓ, Ξ ⊨ ϕ

Proof. We proceed by induction on α ∈ Levt . The basis case of α = p for some p ∈ Var follows by Definition 22. The cases of α = β ∧ γ and α = ∼β can be obtained by a simple application of the induction hypotheses. Now, consider α = KAβ. If KAβ ∈ Ξ, then for every Θ s.t. EΓ

> A

(Ξ , Θ) holds, we have that β ∈ Θ, whence by the induction hypothesis, we have that EΓ, Θ ⊨ β for all Θ s.t. EΓ

> A

(Ξ , Θ) . Hence, EΓ, Ξ ⊨ KAβ.Conversely, assume that EΓ, Ξ ⊨ KAβ. Set ΞA = {KAγ | KAγ ∈ Ξ} ∪ {∼ KAγ | ¬ KAγ ∈ Ξ}. We show that KAβ ∈ ΞA.For that observe that ΞA ∪{∼ β} is EA -unsatisfiable . Indeed, otherwise there would be some Θ ∈ W Γ s.t. ΞA ∪{∼ β} ⊆ Θ. But in such case, by Definition 22, we would have that EA(Ξ , Θ) holds and, furthermore, that E, Θ ⊭ β, by the induction hypothesis. Now, since ΞA ∪ {∼ β} is EA -unsatisfiable, we have that KA(V 

> ξ∈ΞA

ξ → β) is EA -valid. Thus, KA(V 

> ξ∈ΞA

ξ) → KAβ is 

EA -valid. Now, observe that V 

> ξ∈ΞA

ξ → KA(V 

> ξ∈ΞA

ξ) is also EA -valid. Hence, V 

> ξ∈ΞA

ξ → KAβ is EA -valid, Ξ ∪ { KAβ} is satisfiable, and KAβ ∈ Ξ, as required. The case of α = [ a]β can be tackled in a similar manner. If [a]β ∈ Ξ, then for every Θ s.t. RΓ 

> a

(Ξ , Θ) holds, we have that 

β ∈ Θ. By the induction hypothesis, we have that EΓ, Θ ⊨ β for all Θ s.t. RΓ 

> a

(Ξ , Θ) . Hence, EΓ, Ξ ⊨ [a]β.Conversely, assume that EΓ, Ξ ⊨ [a]β. Set Ξa = {γ | [a]γ ∈ Ξ}. We show that Ξa ∪ {∼ β} is EA -unsatisfiable. Assume for contradiction that it is EA -satisfiable . Then, there would be some Θ ∈ W Γ s.t. Ξa ∪ {∼ β} ⊆ Θ. But by Definition 22, we would have that RΓ

> A

(Ξ , Θ) holds. Additionally, by the induction hypothesis, EΓ, Θ ⊭ β. Hence, EΓ, Ξ ⊭ [a]β, contrary to the assumption. It follows that Ξa ∪ {∼ β} is EA -unsatisfiable. Hence, V 

> ξ∈Ξa

ξ → β is EA -valid, and so is V 

> ξ∈Ξa

[a]ξ → [a]β.Thus, Ξ ∪ { [a]β} is EA -satisfiable and [a]β ∈ Ξ.

Theorem 2. Given ϕ ∈ LPr EA , it is PSPACE -complete to decide whether it is satisfiable over finitely branching frames. Proof. We begin by noting that tableaux for finite sets of formulas always terminate since all rules have the branching factor of at most 2 and decompose formulas into their subformulas. We construct a tableau for {w01 :ϕ ≥ 1} in a standard way. We begin with propositional rules working with branches in a depth-first manner. Once no more propositional rules are applicable, we begin applying rules for modalities as follows. First, we pick one constraint w0:[ a]χ ≤ P or w0:KAχ ≤ P and apply □≤

or K≤, respectively. This generates a new state, say, w11,1 and a relational term w0Raw11,1 or w11,1 ∈ cl A (depending on the rule we applied). Using this new state, we apply rules □≥ or K≥ that utilise it as a premise. In that new state, we then apply propositional rules and repeat the process. It is clear that in at most l(ϕ) repetitions we will generate a state, say wm 

> 1,1

with m ≤ l(ϕ), s.t. all constraints wm

> 1,1

:ψ▽P

are propositional (i.e., do not contain modalities on the outer layer ). Then we apply propositional rules until all constraints are decomposed into the ones of the form wm

> 1,1

:Pr A(α)▽Q with α ∈ Levt . This produces the following system of polynomial inequalities that corresponds to the current branch B and state wm 

> 1,1

(below, ψ’s are complex formulas s.t. wm

> 1,1

:ψ occurs on B,and P ’s and Q’s are polynomials over [0 , 1] with integer coefficients): 

n

xwm 

> 1,1:ψ

▽P | (wm

> 1,1

:ψ▽P )∈B

o

∪

n

xwm

> 1,1:Pr A(α)

▽Q | (wm

> 1,1

:Pr A(α)▽Q)∈B

o

∪ Q′≤Q′′ | (wm

> 1,1

:Q′≤Q′′ )∈B (BI 

> wm
> 1,1

)For every A ∈ Agt , we define 

At A(wm

> 1,1

) = {α | w:Pr A(α)▽P ∈ B}

SF ∼ 

> A

(wm

> 1,1

) = {β | ∃ α ∈ At A(wm

> 1,1

) : β is a subformula of α} ∪ {¬ β | ∃ α ∈ At A(wm

> 1,1

) : β is a subformula of α}

Now, consider an MCS event model for SF ∼ 

> A

(wm

> 1,1

) (recall Definition 22) and denote it with Xwm

> 1,1,A

. Observe that Xwm 

> 1,1,A

has an at most exponential size w.r.t. l(ϕ).We now need to ensure that the values of xwm

> 1,1:Pr A(α)

’s are coherent with a measure on Xwm

> 1,1,A

, i.e., there is a measure 

μwm 

> 1,1,A

on Xwm 

> 1,1,A

s.t μwm

> 1,1,A

(∥α∥) = xwm

> 1,1:Pr A(α)

. For that, we introduce new variables yAα for every α ∈ At A(wm

> 1,1

) and 

uA 

> Ξ

for every Ξ ⊆ SF ∼ 

> A

(wm

> 1,1

). Here, y’s are auxiliary variables that will stand for the values of Pr A(α)’s at w, and u’s are the values of μwm

> 1,1,A

({Ξ})’s (i.e., we encode the probability distribution induced by μwm

> 1,1,A

). Furthermore, we set aΞ,α = 1 if 

α ∈ Ξ and aΞ,α = 0 , otherwise. Now, we consider the following system of linear equations: 

X 

> Ξ⊆SF ∼
> A(w)

uA 

> Ξ

= 1 

| {z }

> add

∪

X 

> Ξ⊆SF ∼
> A(w)

(aΞ,α · uA 

> Ξ

) = yAα | α ∈ At A(w)

| {z }

> form

(big Awm 

> 1,1

)In this system, add ensures that the measures of all states in Xw,A , and form guarantees that Pr A(α)’s are obtained as the sums of measures of states where α’s are true. One can see that ( big Awm 

> 1,1

) contains |At A(w)| + 1 equations Thus, applying (Chvátal 1983, Theorem 9.3), we can guess a list L containing |At A(wm

> 1,1

)| + 1 variables uA 

> Ξ

s.t. Ξ’s are maximal consistent subsets of SF ∼ 

> A

(wm

> 1,1

) and for every α ∈ At A(wm

> 1,1

), there is some Ξ s.t. α ∈ Ξ. Then we set uA 

> Ξ

= 0 for every uA 

> Ξ

/∈ L. This gives us the following system of equations whose size is polynomial w.r.t. At A(wm

> 1,1

):

X 

> uA
> Ξ∈L

uA 

> Ξ

= 1 

 ∪

X 

> uA
> Ξ∈L

(aΞ,α · uA 

> Ξ

) = yAα | α ∈ At A(w)

 (small Awm 

> 1,1

)Observe that it takes polynomial space to produce ( small Awm 

> 1,1

). First, the values of a given a can be determined in linear time w.r.t. l(ϕ). Second, to check that a given Ξ ⊆ SF ∼ 

> A

(wm

> 1,1

) is a maximal consistent subset, it suffices to check that Ξ is satisfiable but Ξ ∪ { α} is unsatisfiable for every α / ∈ Ξ. Since formulas in SF ∼ 

> A

(wm

> 1,1

) contain only S5 and K modalities, it follows that these checks require only polynomial space. We repeat this process, obtaining ( small Awm 

> 1,1

)’s for every A ∈ Agt . Then, we consider the following system of polynomial inequalities: 

Swm 

> 1,1

= BI 

> w

∪ [

> A∈Agt

(small Awm 

> 1,1

) ∪ [

> α∈At A(w)
> A∈Agt

n

yAα = xwm

> 1,1:Pr A(α)

o

Note that the size of Swm 

> 1,1

is polynomial in l(ϕ). Thus, it takes polynomial space to determine whether Swm 

> 1,1

has solutions. If it does not , then we close B, and pick the next branch in the tableau. If it does , we delete ( BI 

> wm
> 1,1

) and ( small Aw ), mark the constraint that produced it (i.e., wm−11,1 :[ a]χ ≤ Q or wm−11,1 :KAχ ≤ Q) as ‘safe’ and also delete its associated relational term (wm−11,1 Rawm 

> 1,1

or wm 

> 1,1

∈ cl A, depending on whether we had applied an action rule or an epistemic rule). We then pick the next constraint in wm−11,1 that can produce a new state (say, wm−11,1 :[ b]τ ≤ Q′) and repeat the process. Once all constraints of the form 

wm−11,1 :[ a]χ′ ≤ Q′ and wm−11,1 :KAχ′ ≤ Q′ are marked safe, we guess small Awm−11,1

as shown above and consider Swm−11,1

. Note, furthermore, that if all probabilistic atoms occurring in wm−11,1 are in the scope of modalities, it suffices to check that BI

> wm−11,1

has solutions. We repeat the process until either w01 is marked safe (in which case, ϕ is satisfiable) or all branches of our tableau are closed (whence, ϕ is unsatisfiable). Finally, recall that the depth of the model is bounded from above by l(ϕ); moreover, each state w contains only BI 

> w

and Sw, whose sizes are polynomial w.r.t. l(ϕ). Thus, we need polynomial space to execute the procedure. The result follows. 

# B Proofs of Section 5 

Before proceeding to the proofs, let us introduce the following notational convention. 

Convention 3. Given a sequence of box-like modalities, R■ is the composition of relations that correspond to modalities in that sequence. Similarly, if ♦ is a sequence of diamond-like modalities, R♦ is the composition of relations corresponding to modalities in ♦. E.g., if ■ = [ a]KB [a], then R■ = Ra ◦ EB ◦ Ra. Note that R■ = R♦ when modalities in ■ and ♦ are over the same sequence of relations. Continuing our example, setting ♦ = ⟨a⟩bKB ⟨b⟩ implies R♦ = Ra ◦ EB ◦ Ra = R■.B.1 Proofs of Section 5.1 

In this section, we will prove Theorem 4. Our plan is as follows. First, we will prove the result for the outer-layer counterparts 

of UPR ’s. Then, we will lift it to the probabilistic case. Let us now introduce universal modal rules .

Definition 23 (Universal modal rules) . A universal modal rule (UMR ) is 

• either a formula of the form Jni=1 νi → ν′ s.t. ν’s are proper ■-literals; 

• or a formula of the form Jni=1 νi → 0 s.t. ν’s are ■-literals. A UMR theory is a set of LEA -formulas containing UMR ’s. For simplicity, we will write rules of the form ν → 0 as ♦-literals. 

We abuse the notation slightly and assume that UMR ’s are formulated in LEA and interpreted over EA ŁΠ-models. Further-more, we observe from Remark 1 that UMR ’s have the witnessed model property. Notice also that UMR ’s can be equivalently represented as follows: 

> n

K

> i=1

νi → ν′ ≡

> n

M

> i=1

πi ⊕ ν′

> n

K

> i=1

νi → 0 ≡

> n

M

> i=1

πi (¬νi ≡ πi)

UMR ’s represented with ⊕ are called clauses .Let us now show that the satisfiability of sets of UML ’s and UPL ’s is polynomially decidable. In addition, we establish that the entailment of a UML from a set of UML ’s (and likewise, the entailment of a UPL from a set of UPL ’s) can also be verified in polynomial time. 

Lemma 3. Given a set of UML ’s Λ and a UML λ′, it takes polynomial time to verify whether 1. Λ is EA ŁΠ-satisfiable; 2. Λ |=EA ŁΠ λ′.Proof. For the first item, we construct a tableau for {w:λ≥y, y =1 | λ ∈ Λ} (we rewrite ♦l as ¬■¬l). We apply the rules in a standard manner: first propositional, then rules that generate new states, and then rules that use the states on the branch. As rules for modalities and ¬ do not produce branching, the tableau will contain only one branch B. As one UML contains either ■’s or ♦’s but not both, B will contain at most as many states as there were ♦’s in Λ, and each state will contain only subformulas of the formulas in Λ. Thus, BI will be of polynomial size w.r.t. the size of Λ and will only contain linear inequalities. Thus, it can be solved in polynomial time. For the second item, the reasoning is similar, but we construct a tableau for {w:λ≥y, y =1 | λ ∈ Λ} ∪ { w:λ′≤z, z< 1}.

Lemma 4. Given a set of UPL ’s Θ and a UPL θ′, it takes polynomial time to verify whether 1. Θ is EA Pr -satisfiable; 2. Θ |=EA Pr θ′.Proof. We begin with Item 1. Let Θ = {θ1, . . . , θ n}. We construct a tableau for ΘT = {w:θ≥y, y =1 | θ ∈ Θ}. From Lemma 3, we know that it will take polynomial time to build it and check whether it is closed. Furthermore, one can see that the tableau will have only one branch B and (if open) will induce a model that evaluates probabilistic atoms over {0, 1}. If the tableau is open, we proceed as follows: for every state w′ occurring on B and for every agent A s.t. w′:Pr A(λ)▽P occurs on B, construct a pointed event model ⟨Mw′,A , x w′,A ⟩ for the following set of formulas: 

Λw′,A = {λ | w′:Pr A(λ) ≥ 1 occurs on B} ∪ {¬ λ′ | w′:Pr A(λ′) ≤ 0 occurs on B} (1) Note from Fig. 1 that we can reduce polynomials occurring on B to either 1 or 0 in polynomial time because c = 1 (by the construction of the tableau) is the only constant that can occur on B, and we only use the 1 − P operation. Note furthermore, that if Λw′,A is classically unsatisfiable, then Θ is EA Pr -unsatisfiable. Since Λw′,A ’s contain only uniform literals, it is clear that it takes polynomial time to construct a classical event model for them (or verify that no model exists). It now remains to define a EA Pr -model for Θ. We set M = ⟨W, E, R, X, μ, V ⟩ as follows: 

W = {w′ | w′ occurs on B}; w′EAw′′ iff w′∈cl A and w′′ ∈cl A occur on B for some epistemic relational label cl A (recall Definition 12); w′Raw′′ iff w′Raw′′ occurs on B; ⟨X, V ⟩ = U w′∈W

> A∈Agt

Mw′,A ; μw′,A ({x}) = 1 if x = xw′,A and μ({x}) = 0 ,otherwise. It is clear that IM(θ, w ) = 1 (with w being the state label occurring in ΘT ) for all θ ∈ Θ.For Item 2, we construct a tableau for {w:θ≥y, y =1 | θ ∈ Θ} ∪ { w:θ′≤z, z < 1}. Again, from Lemma 3, it follows that the tableau can be constructed in polynomial time. Observe also that the application of tableaux rules to w:θ′≤d will produce either s:Pr A′ (λ′)<1 (if θ′ does not contain ¬) or s:Pr A′ (λ′)>0 (if it does ). Hence, we need to construct pointed event models 

⟨M′

> w′,A

, x ′

> w′,A

⟩ for the following sets of formulas for each w′ and A occurring on B:

Λ′ 

> w′,A

= Λ w′,A ∪ { λ′ | w′:Pr A(λ′)>0 occurs on B} ∪ {¬ λ′ | w′:Pr A(λ′)<1 occurs on B}

Just as in the previous case, we can build models for Λ′ 

> w′,A

(or establish that they do not exist) in polynomial time. We note briefly that if there is no model for Λ′

> w′,A

, this means that Λw′,A |=S5 +K λ′ (Λw′,A |=S5 +K ¬λ′, respectively). In this case, there cannot be an event model X and a measure μ on it s.t. μ(∥λ∥X) = 1 for every λ ∈ Λw′,A but μ(∥λ′∥X) < 1

(μ(∥λ′∥X) > 0, respectively). Finally, the model witnessing Θ̸ |=EA Pr θ′ can be built in polynomial time. Next, we show that entailment between modal literals can be decided on classical event models , i.e., event models s.t. 

V (p, w ) ∈ { 0, 1} for every state and variable. In particular, it will follow that Λ |=EA ŁΠ ¬π is equivalent to Λ, λ |=EA ŁΠ 0.Note that this is not the case for arbitrary (even propositional) formulas: 

q, ¬¬¬ (( p → ¬ p) → ¬ p) |=EA ŁΠ 0 but q̸ |=EA ŁΠ ¬¬ (( p → ¬ p) → ¬ p)

Lemma 5. Let Λ be a set of UML ’s and π a ♦-literal s.t. Λ̸ |=EA ŁΠ ¬π. Then Λ, π ̸ |=EA ŁΠ 0 and Λ ∪ { π} is satisfiable in a (classical) event model. Proof. Let M = ⟨W, E, R, V ⟩ be an EA ŁΠ-model witnessing Λ̸ |=EA ŁΠ ¬π. This means that there is some w ∈ W s.t. 

IM(λ, w ) = 1 for all λ ∈ Λ and IM(π, w ) > 0. We will define a (classical) model M′ = ⟨W, E, R, V ′⟩ on the same frame and show that IM′ (π, w ) = 1 and IM′ (λ, w ) = 1 for all λ ∈ Λ. We assume w.l.o.g. that M is finitely branching and consider two cases: (1) π does not contain ¬ and (2) π contains ¬.We begin with the first case and proceed by induction on the number of modalities in π. Define V ′ as follows: for all 

w∈W , V ′(p, w )=1 iff V (p, w )>0. We show that (a) IM′ (λ, w )=1 for every ¬-free ♦-literal λ s.t. IM(λ, w ) > 0 and (b) 

IM′ (λ, w ) = 1 for every UML λ s.t. IM(λ, w ) = 1 . In the basis case for (a) and (b), λ = p. The statements follow by the construction of V ′. Now let λ = ¬p. In this case, (a) holds vacuously, and we consider (b). If IM(¬p, w ) = 1 , then 

V (p, w ) = 0 , whence V ′(p, w ) = 0 and thus, IM′ (¬p, w ) = 1 , as required. Assume now that λ = ⟨a⟩π′ for some ¬-free π′.For (a), let IM(⟨a⟩π′, w ) > 0. Then IM(π′, w ′) > 0 for some w′ ∈ Ra(w), whence by the induction hypothesis, we have that 

IM′ (π′, w ′) = 1 , and thus, IM′ (⟨a⟩π′, w ) = 1 . The reasoning for (b) is similar. Now let λ = ⟨a⟩π′ with π′ containing negation. Again, (a) holds vacuously, so we consider (b). If IM(⟨a⟩π′, w ) = 1 , then 

IM(π′, w ′) = 1 for some w′ ∈ Ra(w). By the induction hypothesis, we have IM′ (π′, w ′) = 1 , whence IM′ (⟨a⟩π′, w ) = 1 .The case λ = bKAπ can be considered in the same manner. Finally, let λ = [ a]ν′. We consider (b). If IM([ a]ν′, w ) = 1 , then IM(ν′, w ′) = 1 for all w′ ∈ Ra(w). Hence, by the induction hypothesis, we have IM′ (ν′, w ′) = 1 for all w′ ∈ Ra(w). It follows that IM′ ([ a]ν′, w ) = 1 . The case of λ = KAν′

is similar. Now consider the second case. Again, we prove the statement by induction on the number of modalities in π. We define V ′

as follows: V ′(p, w ) = 1 iff V (p, w ) = 1 . Just as in the previous case, we show that IM′ (λ, w ) = 1 for every UML λ s.t. 

IM(λ, w ) > 0. The basis case of λ = p follows by construction. If λ = ¬p, then IM(¬p, w ) > 0 entails that V (p, w ) < 1,whence V ′(p, w ) = 0 and IM′ (¬p, w ) = 1 , as required. If λ = ⟨a⟩π′, then IM(⟨a⟩π′, w ) > 0 implies IM(π′, w ′) > 0 for some w′ ∈ Ra(w). By the induction hypothesis, we obtain IM′ (π′, w ′)=1 for some w′∈Ra(w), whence IM′ (⟨a⟩π′, w ) = 1 .The cases of other modalities can be handled in the same way. It now follows that if M witnesses Λ̸ |=EA ŁΠ ¬π, then M′ witnesses Λ, π ̸ |=EA ŁΠ 0.Now, we can establish our first key result. 

Definition 24. A UMR theory Γ = Ξ ∪ Λ with Ξ = {κ1, . . . , κ m} and Λ = {λ1, . . . , λ n} is called EA ŁΠ-irreducible if there is no λ occurring in Ξ s.t. Λ |=EA ŁΠ ¬λ.

Observe from Lemmas 4 and 5 that it takes polynomial time to check whether a given UMR theory is EA ŁΠ-irreducible. 

Lemma 6. Let Γ = Ξ ∪ Λ with Ξ = {κ1, . . . , κ m} and Λ = {λ1, . . . , λ n} be an EA ŁΠ-irreducible UMR theory. Then it is 

EA ŁΠ-satisfiable. Proof. Assume w.l.o.g. that κ’s contain at least two literals each and κ’s are written using ⊕’s. First, observe that Λ is EA ŁΠ-satisfiable: otherwise, Λ |=EA ŁΠ ¬λ for every literal λ. Now let ⟨M, w ⟩ be a pointed model s.t. IM(λ, w ) = 1 for all λ ∈ Λ.Observe from the proof of Lemma 3 that since we use tableaux to build the model of Λ, it is classical , that is, all variables have values in {0, 1}. Now, in every clause κ ∈ Ξ, pick one proper ♦-literal πκ.Note that there is no ♦-literal πκ s.t. Λ |=EA ŁΠ ¬πκ. Thus, by Lemma 5, there is a classical model satisfying Λ ∪ { πκ} for each πκ. Moreover, it is clear that {πκ | κ ∈ Ξ} is also EA -satisfiable. Let us now show that Λ′ = Λ ∪ { πκ | κ ∈ Ξ} is 

EA -satisfiable. We proceed as follows. Let πκi = ♦ili for i ∈ { 1, . . . , m } with l’s being propositional variables or their negations. Consider a (classical) pointed event model ⟨M, w ⟩ that EA -satisfies Λ ∪ { ♦1l1}. We now need to build an event model that EA -satisfies 

Λ ∪ { πκ1 , π κ2 }. Since Λ̸ |=EA ŁΠ ¬♦2l2, we can w.l.o.g. assume that if R♦2 (w)̸ = ∅, then there is at least one w′ ∈ R♦2

s.t. V (l2, w ′)̸ = 0 . Since the model is classical, we have V (l2, w ′) = 1 for that state, which gives IM(♦2l2, w ′) = 1 , as required. If R♦2 (w) = ∅, let ♦2 = ♦2,1 . . . ♦2,k and add states w1, . . . , wk to M s.t. wiR♦2,i wi+1 for i ≤ k − 1. For every 

wi ∈ { w1, . . . , w k} s.t. there is some ■′l′ ∈ Λ with wi ∈ R■′ (w), additionally set V (l′, w i) = 1 . Repeating this construction for all πκ’s we obtain a classical pointed event model that EA -satisfies Λ′. Call it ⟨MΞ, w ⟩.Now, observe that ⟨MΞ, w ⟩ satisfies Λ and every clause that contains at least one proper ♦-literal. Thus, the only clauses that are not yet satisfied by ⟨MΞ, w ⟩ are the ones that contain only propositional literals. For those, we set V (p, w ) = 12 for each variable p occurring in such clauses. Note that this does not affect the value of formulas in Λ: if Λ |=EA ŁΠ p, then we do not need to consider propositional clauses containing p, and if Λ |=EA ŁΠ ¬p, then no clause can contain p because Γ is irreducible (and dually for ¬p). Similarly, we can w.l.o.g. assume that if some proper ♦-literal π is true at w, then its value is witnessed by some w′̸ = w. Finally, we do not consider the values of ■-literals in clauses. It follows that MΞ (with the updated valuation of variables at w) satisfies Γ.We can now show that EA ŁΠ-satisfiability of UMR theories is polynomially decidable. 

Lemma 7. Given a UMR theory Γ, it takes polynomial time to verify whether it is EA ŁΠ-satisfiable. Proof. First, observe briefly that if Γ contains only clauses with at least two literals each, then it is satisfiable. Indeed, it suffices to consider a model with one state w s.t. all accessibility relations are equal to {⟨ w, w ⟩} and all variables are evaluated at 12 .Each literal in every clause will also have value 12 . Since there are at least two literals per clause, this satisfies Γ.Now let Γ = Ξ ∪ Λ with Ξ = {κ1, . . . , κ m} and Λ = {λ1, . . . , λ n} and κ’s having at least two literals each. We proceed as follows. First, we check that Λ is satisfiable. By Lemma 3, this takes us polynomial time. Then for every literal λ occurring in Ξ, we check whether (1) Λ |=EA ŁΠ ¬λ or (2) Λ |=EA ŁΠ ¬λ. In the first case, we remove from Ξ all κ’s that contain λ. In the second case, we remove all occurrences of λ from Ξ. Again, this takes us polynomial time to check all literals. If at some stage we have a clause λ′ ⊕ λ′′ s.t. Λ |=EA ŁΠ ¬λ′′ , then we remove occurrences of λ′′ and check that Λ ∪ { λ′} is satisfiable. We then use Λ′ = Λ ∪ { λ′} to check the remaining literals. We proceed in this way until either (i) we encounter a clause λ1 ⊕ λ2 s.t. 

Λ′ |=EA ŁΠ ¬λ1 and Λ′, λ 2 |=EA ŁΠ 0 or (ii) we produce an EA ŁΠ-irreducible theory. In the first case, Γ is unsatisfiable, in the second case, Γ is satisfiable. It remains to lift our argument to universal probabilistic rules. The next statement can be shown similarly to Lemma 5. 

Lemma 8. Let Θ be a set of UPL ’s and ζ a ♦Pr -literal s.t. Θ̸ |=EA Pr ¬ζ. Then Θ, ζ ̸ |=EA Pr 0.Proof. Let ζ = ♦′Pr A(λ′). We construct a tableau for {w:θ ≥ y, y = 1 | θ ∈ Θ} ∪ { w:■¬Pr A(λ′) ≤ z, z < 1}. Since 

Θ̸ |=EA Pr ¬ζ, this tableau should be open and also have only one branch B. Now, let w′ be the state s.t. w′:Pr A(λ′) ≥ 1 − z

occurs on B and that was generated by applying □≤ and K≤ rules to ■¬Pr A(λ′). Observe, furthermore, that apart from 

Pr A(λ′), all other formulaic constraints labelled with w′ on B have the form w′:ϕ ≥ 1 or w′:ϕ ≤ 0.Using the reasoning from Theorem 2, we can assume w.l.o.g. that there is an SI model M = ⟨W, R, E, X, μ, V ⟩ that witnesses 

Θ̸ |=EA Pr ¬ζ s.t. W = {w | w occurs on B} and X = U 

> w∈W

Xw. It follows that μw′,A (∥λ∥Xw′ ) = 1 for every λ s.t. 

w′:Pr A(λ) ≥ 1 occurs on B and μ(∥λ∥Xw′ ) = 0 for every λ s.t. w′:Pr A(λ) ≤ 0 occurs on B. Additionally, we have that 

μw′,A (∥λ′∥Xw′,A ) = z′ > 0.Now, we can construct Λw′,A as shown in (1). It follows that there is some x ∈ Xw′ s.t. Xw′ , x ⊨ λ′ ∧ V 

> λ′′ ∈Λw′,A

λ′′ .Now, we can replace μw′,A with μ′ 

> w′,A

defined as follows: μ′

> w′,A

(X) = 1 if x ∈ X and μ′

> w′,A

(X) = 0 , otherwise. Observe that μ′

> w′,A

(∥λ′∥Xw′ ) = 1 . Now let M′ be M where μw,A is replaced with μ′

> w,A

. It is clear that IM(♦Pr A(λ′), w ) = 1 and 

IM′ (θ, w ) = 1 for all θ ∈ Θ. Thus, M′ witnesses Θ, ζ ̸ |=EA Pr 0.Finally, if ζ = ♦′¬Pr A(λ′), the reasoning is similar. The only difference is that we will have Xw′ and x in such a way that Xw′ , x ⊨ ¬λ′ ∧ V 

> λ′′ ∈Λw′,A

λ′′ . Thus, redefining the measure as above, will give us μ′

> w′,A

(∥¬ λ′∥Xw′ ) = 1 , whence 

μ′

> w′,A

(∥λ′∥Xw′ ) = 0 , IM′ (¬Pr A(λ′), w ′) = 1 and IM(♦¬Pr A(λ′), w ) = 1 .

Definition 25. A UPR theory Γ = Θ ∪ Ξ with Θ = {θ1, . . . , θ m} and Ξ = {κ1, . . . , κ n} is called EA Pr -irreducible iff there is no UPL θ occurring in Ξ s.t. Θ |=EA Pr ¬θ.

Just as it was with UMR theories, one can see that it takes polynomial time to check that a given UPR theory is EA Pr -irreducible. Let us now show that irreducible UPR theories are EA Pr -satisfiable. 

Lemma 9. Let Γ = Θ ∪ Ξ with Θ = {θ1, . . . , θ m} and Ξ = {κ1, . . . , κ n} be an EA Pr -irreducible UPR theory. Then it is 

EA Pr -satisfiable. Proof. We reason in the same manner as for Lemma 6, but use Lemma 8 instead of Lemma 5. For every κ ∈ Ξ, we pick one proper ♦Pr -literal ζκ and consider a pointed EA Pr -model ⟨M, w ⟩ that satisfies Θ′ = Θ ∪ { ζκ | κ ∈ Ξ}. For every clause 

κ′ ∈ Ξ that does not contain proper literals, we set its literals at 12 . To do that, we consider a disjoint union of two event models: 

X+ ⊎ X− s.t. X+, x + ⊨ λ′ and X−, x − ⊭ λ′ for every λ′ that occurs in some κ′ that does not contain proper literals. Then, for every A ∈ Agt , we define μw,A ({x+}) = μw,A ({x−}) = 12 . Now, given a clause κ′ that does not contain proper literals, we have IM(ζ′, w ) = 12 for every ζ′ in κ′. Thus, M satisfies Γ.Now, using the same reasoning as in Lemma 7 and applying Lemmas 4 and 9, we can obtain the main result of the section. 

Theorem 4. Given a UPR theory Γ, it takes polynomial time to verify whether it is EA Pr -satisfiable. B.2 Proofs of Section 5.2 

In this section, we prove Theorem 5. Our approach is similar to the case of universal probabilistic rules. That is, we first prove our results for the modal Łukasiewicz logic and then expand them to the probabilistic case. 

Definition 26. An existential positive modal rule (EMR +) is a formula of one of the following kinds: 

• a UML ;

• Jni=1 πi → 0 with π’s being propositional literals or ¬-free ♦-literals; 

• Jni=1 πi → π with π’s being proper ¬-free ♦-literals. 

Note that EMR +’s can also be represented as ⊕-clauses that contain at most one proper ■-literal. Thus, in a sense they are dual to UMR ’s (though, they are a bit more restrictive since they cannot have both ¬ and K in the same theory). Let us now establish an analogue of Lemma 5 for ■-literals. The proof is similar. 

Lemma 10. Let Λ be a set of UML ’s and ν a ■-literal s.t. Λ̸ |=EA ŁΠ ¬ν. Then Λ, ν ̸ |=EA ŁΠ 0 and Λ ∪ { ν} is satisfiable in a (classical) event model. Proof. Let M = ⟨W, E, R, V ⟩ be an EA ŁΠ-model witnessing Λ̸ |=EA ŁΠ ¬ν. This means that there is some w ∈ W s.t. 

IM(λ, w ) = 1 for all λ ∈ Λ and IM(ν, w ) > 0. We will define a classical model M′ = ⟨W, E, R, V ′⟩ on the same frame and show that IM′ (ν, w ) = 1 and IM′ (λ, w ) = 1 for all λ ∈ Λ. We assume w.l.o.g. that M is finitely branching and consider two cases: (1) ν does not contain ¬ and (2) ν contains ¬.In the first case, for all w ∈ W , we define V ′(p, w ) = 1 iff V (p, w ) > 0 (and V ′(p, w ) = 0 , otherwise). In the second case, for all w ∈ W , we set V ′(p, w ) = 1 iff V (p, w ) = 1 (and V ′(p, w ) = 0 , otherwise). We can then show by induction on the number of modalities in ν that M′ satisfies Λ ∪ { ν}. The reasoning is the same as in Lemma 5. We define EA ŁΠ-irreducible EMR + theories in the same way as UMR theories (recall Definition 24). Let us now show the analogue of Lemma 6. 

Lemma 11. Let Γ = Ξ ∪ Λ with Ξ = {κ1, . . . , κ m} and Λ = {λ1, . . . , λ n} be an EA ŁΠ-irreducible EMR + theory. Then it is 

EA ŁΠ-satisfiable. Proof. The proof is similar to that of Lemma 6. The main difference is that we will use Lemma 10 and the fact that any set Λ′

of proper ■-literals is classically satisfiable if ν = ■¬p for all ν ∈ Λ.Now, if Γ is an EMR + theory, we use this fact as follows. Since Γ is irreducible, there are a classical model M = ⟨W, E, R, V ⟩

and w ∈ W s.t. M, w ⊨ λ for all λ ∈ Λ. Now, we can represent rules in Ξ as ⊕-clauses of the following form: ♦p⊕Lki=1 ■¬pi

and Lki=1 ■¬pi, depending on whether the rules had empty head. From Definition 26, it follows that either (A) a clause contains a proper ■-literal or (B) it is propositional. Now for every clause κ that satisfies (A), we choose a proper ■-literal νκ.We show that Λ ∪ { νκ | κ ∈ Ξ} is EA -satisfiable. For that, construct a pointed event model ⟨M, w ⟩ that EA -satisfies Λ

using tableaux. Observe that ■¬p ∈ Θ s.t. R■(w)̸ = ∅, we have V (p, w ′) = 0 for all w′ ∈ R■(w). Indeed, if there were some state w′′ ∈ R■ s.t. V (p, w ) = 1 , it would mean that Λ |=EA ŁΠ ♦p, i.e., Λ |=EA ŁΠ ¬■¬p. But this would contradict our assumption that Γ is irreducible. Hence, ⟨M, w ⟩ satisfies Λ ∪ Θ. Now, the only clauses in Γ that are not satisfied by ⟨M, w ⟩

are propositional. We proceed in the same way as in Lemma 6 and set V (p, w ) = 12 for every variable in every propositional clause that is not satisfied by ⟨M, w ⟩. It follows that M (with an updated valuation) satisfies Γ.The next statement can now be shown in the same way as Lemma 7. 

Lemma 12. Given an EMR + theory Γ, it takes polynomial time to verify whether it is EA ŁΠ-satisfiable. 

Now, the following statements can be obtained in the same way as Lemmas 8 and 9. 

Lemma 13. Let Θ be a set of UPL ’s and η a ■Pr -literal s.t. Θ̸ |=EA Pr ¬ζ. Then Θ, ζ ̸ |=EA Pr 0.

Lemma 14. Let Γ = Θ ∪ Ξ with Θ = {θ1, . . . , θ m} and Ξ = {κ1, . . . , κ n} be an EA Pr -irreducible EPR + theory. Then it is 

EA Pr -satisfiable. 

Finally, the main result of the section can be obtained from Lemmas 4, 8, and 14 in the same way as Theorem 4. 

Theorem 5. Given an EPR + theory Γ, it takes polynomial time to verify whether it is EA Pr -satisfiable.