Title: 2604.07601v1.pdf

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.07601v1

Published Time: Fri, 10 Apr 2026 00:14:47 GMT

Number of Pages: 12

Markdown Content:
# Google, AI Literacy, and the Learning Sciences: Multiple Modes of 

# Research, Industry, and Practice Partnerships 

Victor R. Lee (co -chair), Stanford University, vrlee@stanford.edu 

Michael Madaio (co -chair), Google Research, madaiom@google.com 

Ben Garside, Raspberry Pi Foundation, ben.garside@raspberrypi.org 

Aimee Welch, Google DeepMind Impact Accelerator, aimeewelch@google.com 

Kristen Pilner Blair, Stanford University, kpilner@stanford.edu 

Ibrahim Oluwajoba Adisa, Stanford University, jobaa@stanford.edu 

Alon Harris, Google Research, alonharris@google.com 

Kevin Holst, Google Research, kevinholst@google.com 

Liat Ben Rafael, Google Research, liatb@google.com 

Ronit Levavi Morad, Google Research, ronitlm@google.com 

Ben Travis, Phantom LLC, ben@phntms.com 

Belle Moller, Phantom LLC, belle@phntms.com 

Andrew Shields, Phantom LLC, andrew.shields@phntms.com 

Zak Brown, Phantom LLC, zak@ph ntms.com 

Lois Hinx, Phantom LLC, lois@ph ntms.com 

Marisol Diaz, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, marisold@mit.edu 

Evan Patton, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, ewpatton@mit.edu 

Selim Tezel, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, stezel@mit.edu 

Robert Parks, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, rparks@mit.edu 

Hal Abelson, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, hal@mit.edu 

Adam Blasioli, New York Jobs CEO Council, ablasioli@jobscouncil.org 

Jeremy Roschelle (discussant), Digital Promise, jroschelle@digitalpromise.org 

Abstract: Enabling AI literacy in the general population at scale is a complex challenge 

requiring multiple stakeholders and institutions collaborating together. Industry and technology 

companies are important actors with respect to AI, and as a field, we have the o pportunity to 

consider how researchers and companies might be partners toward shared goals. In this 

symposium, we focus on a collection of partnership projects that all involve Google and all 

address AI literacy as a comparative set of examples . Through a combination of presentations, 

commentary, and moderated group discussion, the session, we will identify (1) at what points 

in the life cycle do research, practice, and industry partnerships clearly intersect; (2) what factors 

and histories shap e the directional focus of the partnerships; and (3) where there may be future 

opportunities for new configurations of partnership that are jointly beneficial to all parties. 

# Overview 

In line with the theme of “Partnering with Purpose”, we invite the field to consider what purposeful partnership 

looks like at our current time between industry and the learning sciences. While much work from the learning 

sciences community currently invol ves generative collaborations with organizational units such as schools, 

districts, informal learning spaces, civic groups, and other types of nonprofits, it is worth noting that there has 

been precedence for and interest in industry and learning sciences collaboration. For example, the Institute for 

the Learning Sciences at Northwestern University, founded in 1989 and considered an important catalyst for 

learning sciences in North America, was seeded by funding and collaboration with the business entity th at was 

then called Andersen Consulting. This contributed to the design and development of goal -based scenario 

software environments (Schank et al, 1994) that integrated key discoveries about learning with job contexts like 

being a journalist or a sickle ce ll genetic counselor. Boeing, the aircraft manufacturing company, partnered with 

learning scientists at the University of Washington to develop and experimentally compare the effectiveness of 

new forms of employee training (O’Mahony et al., 2011). Now, wit h substantial investment, attention, and 

energy being directed to artificial intelligence in education, we believe a new conversation is needed. There are 

shared interests and concerns about achieving impact for learners and supporting future workforce preparation, 

where AI is expected to play a major role in our lives. At the same time, there are seemingly different orienting 

frameworks , incentives, and practices across the sectors of academic research and the tech sector. Partnerships 

between learning sciences research and industry are forming and maturing, with implications for 

practi tioners . What can we learn from examining and contrasting examples of those? This symposium brings together four projects that share three elements. One is that all the projects 

share a common industry partner: Google. While Google is so well known from its origins as a search engine 

that “google” is now a dictionary verb for onlin e information search, the company is a highly diversified 

multinational corporation and subsidiary of Alphabet Inc. Service, with product teams that work on familiar 

consumer -facing tools and platforms like Google Suite, YouTube, Google Mail, FitBit, Chrom e, Android, and 

Google Drive. Important for this symposium are units at Google that work on research and development, 

philanthropy, and education. As will be discussed in the symposium, there are many such units, and partnerships 

between non -Google researchers and educato rs may begin with one Google sub -unit but over time connect more 

with others. Moreover, funding for collaborations may come out of distinct units under different auspices tied to 

the unit’s missions. In the symposium, we will critically reflect on and discuss the implications for learning 

scientists of partnerships with large corporations, particularly when those entities, in some of the projects, serve 

dual roles as both funder and research and develo pment partner. 

Another shared element across partnerships is that they grapple with ideas, questions, and decisions 

that are core to the ongoing intellectual dialogues of the learning sciences. For example, one project engages 

with questions of curriculum design and teac her learning in service of enacting curriculum, active concerns for 

the field (e.g., Edelson et al., 1999; Davis et al., 2017). Another is rooted in constructionist principles and how 

AI literacy can be fostered through environments oriented toward computa tional action (e.g., Kafai et al., 2024; 

Tissenbaum et al., 2019). One more project builds on scholarship around learning game design and digital 

scaffolds (e.g., Holbert & Wilensky, 2017). Additionally, one last focal project for the symposium focuses on 

city -scale learning, a growing area of interest in the field, as partnership efforts with community organizations 

are helping to shape learning opportunities for whole geographic regions. These are not mutually exclusive 

concerns across our contributors, e specially as new directions for further collaboration among these projects or 

with additional partners are explored. We see the diversity of topic areas, learning theories, and learner 

communities as a strength of this symposium, as it allows us to make connections and discuss implications with 

relevance to a range of researchers and practitioners. 

The third shared element is that the partnerships in this session all seek to address the development of 

AI literacy - a level of understanding about AI that does not presume learners will pursue future technical 

activities of AI software development, but instead that they will be able to effectively use or critically engage 

with AI thoughtfully and responsibly in their lives. Enabling AI literacy is a growing global concern and one 

that is being explored in the learning sciences (Kafai et al., 2024). Some efforts have been undertaken to define 

or represent it through the creation of various frameworks, formation of expert groups, or academic literature 

reviews (Long & Magerko, 2020; Miao & Shohira 2024; Mills et al., 2024; Ng et al., 2021). Still, to do work 

that can scale is a complex challenge requiring multiple stakeholders and institutions collaborating together. 

That includes collaborations that involve major tech companies that are creating new AI tools alongside learning 

scientists who use the tools of research and design to understand and improve human learning. This effort , of 

course, creates important opportunities to interrogate the extent to which we want to actively promote and scale 

technologies like AI and what boundaries need to be observed , particularly given the power dynamics involved 

in collaborations between learning scientists and tech companies (Nichols et al., 2025). 

In this symposium, we will reflexively and critically examine and consider similarities and differences 

with respect to how the partnerships originated and evolved , integrate d research and technical expertise, and 

generate d impact in service of AI literacy. Such a reflection may gain new insights into the nature of 

partnerships that leverage the private sector and learning scientists. It would also expose lessons learned due to 

the complexities involved in developing AI literacy resources and experiences for different formats (e.g., 

curriculum, digital game, online interactive tool), audiences (e. g., middle school students, high school students, 

college students, and adults), and contexts (e.g., formal and informal learning, UK and US schools and the 

Global South). Through the session, we will identify (1) at what points in the life cycle do research, practice, 

and industry partnerships intersect; (2) what factors and histories shape the directional focus of the partnerships ,

including the myriad roles for learning scientists in partnerships with corporations ; and (3) where there may be 

future opportunities for new configurations of partnership in the future that are jointly beneficial to all parties. 

# AI literacy and the learning sciences 

Given the increasing ubiquity of AI applications in public life, researchers and policymakers alike have called 

for supporting AI literacy in the broader public (Long & Magerko, 2020; Kafai et al., 2024 ; Miao & Shohira, 

2024). In education, researchers have argued that improving AI literacy can lead to more effective and 

responsible use of AI to support learning (Kim et al., 2025; Humburg et al., 2025). The specific definitions of 

AI literacy vary, but t hey broadly include a set of competencies that enable people to critically reflect on how AI 

models and systems work, how they are designed, and thus, how they are (and should be) used - or not used (Long & Magerko, 2020). Across various AI literacy frameworks, multiple perspectives on AI are promoted 

that differentially emphasize understanding the technical functionality of AI systems like training machine 

learning models or the use of sensors; human -centered, sociotechnical aspects of AI, such as the ways that 

diversity (or the lack thereof) in training data can shape the outputs of AI systems; the active role of humans in 

designing and developing AI models and AI -powered applications; how AI is shou ld and could be used in 

different work functions and professional activities; and the positive and negative impacts of AI on society 

(Miao & Shohira, 2024; Lee & Long, to appear). 

AI literacy has been a topic of interest to the ISLS community in recent years, with multiple symposia 

exploring different approaches to teaching and learning AI literacies in K -12 education (Kafai et al., 2024) and 

investigating how to incorporate equity in AI literacy programs (Walsh et al., 2022). Meanwhile, other learning 

sciences research has explored different aspects of AI literacy, including the impact of AI literacy instruction on 

students’ self -efficacy (Tatar et al., 2023) and empowerment (Kramar czuk et al., 2025), as well as research on 

fostering teachers’ AI literacy (Ocak et al., 2025) and how teachers integrate AI literacy into their lessons 

(Adisa et al., 2025), among others ( e.g., Relmasira et al., 2024). Th is body of research continues to grow. 

However, many current AI literacy educational experiences face systemic challenges. How and where 

AI literacy resides in the educational ecosystem remains unanswered, with crowded curricular requirements in 

schools, unequal access to physical and digital l earning resources, and heterogeneity of the learner population -

ranging from students, educators, and adult learners - each with their own distinct learning needs. 

# Symposium Format 

The symposium is structured to be a joint sense -making session for participants and attendees rather than a 

series of collected presentations. It will involve short lightning talks from invited speakers about each of the 

partnerships described below, all s peaking to the symposium theme about partnerships that enable AI literacy. 

These will be relatively short so that there can be commentary from the invited discussant, Jeremy Roschelle, 

Co -Executive Director and co -lead of Learning Sciences Research at Digi tal Promise. Roschelle will offer his 

perspective on the nature of these partnerships and what we might expect in the future for private sector and 

researcher collaborations. Following that, the bulk of the time is intended to be a Q&A discussion from the 

audience that will be moderated by Roschelle, who will also make thematic connections as they appear in the 

discussion across each of the presentations , with implications for industry partnerships beyond Google .

# Raspberry Pi Foundation: Training teachers and reaching global learners with 

# Experience AI 

Raspberry Pi Foundation (RPF): Ben Garside 

Google DeepMind Impact Accelerator (GDI): Aimee Welch 

# Overview 

Raspberry Pi Foundation is a non -profit organization in the United Kingdom that promotes computer science 

education worldwide. Its reputation and name as a leader in this space was established from the launch of the 

Raspberry Pi single -board controller tha t gained popularity as part of the Maker movement and for Internet of 

Things applications. Google’s DeepMind is a leading AI lab that emphasizes work that supports scientific 

breakthroughs. Some of these include AlphaGo, the first computer program that def eated a Go world champion, 

transformer architectures that are used in modern language models, and AlphaFold, which predicts the 

structures and interactions of proteins, DNA, RNA, ligands and more with high accuracy. DeepMind is also 

behind Gemini, the fami ly of AI models used across Google text, code, image, audio, and video services. 

Experience AI is a free educational program, released in 2023 and developed in a partnership between 

the Raspberry Pi Foundation and Google DeepMind. It offers instructional resources on artificial intelligence 

(AI) and machine learning for educators and young people aged 11 to 14 related to the workings of AI, such as 

lessons on bias, decision trees, and large language models. The Experience AI theory of change is pursued 

through three main activities: providing high -quality, research -led learning content; localizing and translating 

content for market relevance; and partnering with expert implementers to train educators. 

A significant global challenge in introducing AI literacy to classrooms is teacher preparedness. 

Research ( Rajapakse et al., 2024 ) indicates that the rapid pace of change in AI leaves educators feeling unready 

to teach the skills necessary for future generations. The program aims to bring AI literacy education to young 

people globally by upskilling educators, providing them with the resources and self -efficacy to support learners 

in understanding AI's potential role in their lives. Recognizing that there are many specific circumstances for 

different parts of the world that look to Raspberry Pi Foundation for educational support, they have additional collaborations and partners (27 partners in 25 countries) that work to train educators and build their confidence 

in teaching about AI to their students. The team and their partners focused on cultural relevance for the many 

locations and communities invol ved - this involves not only translating resources for educators and learners 

worldwide but also identifying points and examples of local relevance to help make connections to AI more 

visible. Experience AI is presently estimated to have reached 2 million learners, primarily aged 11 -14, although 

a number of Experience AI ’s partners are working with young people up to the age of 18. They prioritize 

working with partners in low and middle -income countries whose mission includes reaching educators and 

young people in underserved communities. Foci include foundational AI concept s, understanding of AI's impact 

on the world, awareness of AI -related careers, and comprehension of societal and ethical issues. Training is 

delivered to educators via both synchronous se ssions and a free asynchronous online course. 

Figure 1 

Raspberry Pi Foundation partners with educators and young people across the globe. 

# Partnerships 

Experience AI (experience -ai.org) was built through a collaboration between industry experts and researchers at 

the Raspberry Pi Foundation and the University of Cambridge, bringing together cutting -edge practice and 

academic rigor to ensure that content and pedagogy are evidence -led (Waite and Garside, 2023; Waite et al., 

2024). Google DeepMind provided initial funding for Experience AI lesson resources and crucial guidance from 

industry experts for the team at Raspberry Pi Foundation , who led content and learning resource development. 

This partnership thrived as Google DeepMind offered real -world AI contexts, case studies, and examples, 

enabling young people to understand the tangible impact of AI as a problem -solving tool. 

With the goal of democratizing access to AI literacy and to make visible that AI education is relevant 

to all, Experience AI lessons intentionally featured aspirational role models from a wide range of backgrounds 

involved in developing AI systems at Google DeepMind. Furthermore, Google.org, the philanthropic arm of 

Google, has facilitated the global expansion of Experience AI b y providing grant funding for Raspberry Pi 

Foundation to scale the curriculum by taking a coordinating role and supporting 27 partn ers across 25 countries 

since 2024 (with plans to add more in 2026). These partners —ranging from non -profits and charitable 

foundations to socially -driven private companies —receive training in AI literacy concepts as well as access to 

the Experience AI materials. Partners work with the Experience AI team to make lesson adaptations so the 

contexts and examples used in the materials are relevant and relatable to young people in their region. In this 

expansion, it was essential to develop c ollaborations with i n-country partners who have a deep understanding of 

their educational landscapes. 

# Insights 

One key insight has been that while the Experience AI “ Foundations” unit was originally designed for a context 

(UK) where a national curriculum for computer science creates a space for teachers to freely introduce AI 

literacy —this is not the case in most of the countries who use Experience AI . Many do not have a dedicated 

computer science curriculum, which means teachers often struggle to see where AI fits. This surfaces the need 

for the team to provide stronger guidance and signposting to show how E xperien ce AI lessons connect with a 

range of subject areas. In addition, AI literacy resources are now being created that are tailored to specific 

subjects, so that they can be more easily integrated into existing curricula and classroom practice, similar to the 

“acro ss the disciplines” approach advocated by Jiang et al (2022). One example of this has been a supplemental stand -alone lesson on “AI and Ecosystems” designed to 

be taught in a science class. A key part of the process was to partner with subject matter experts from the UK’s 

Royal Society of Biology Association's Biolog y Education Research Group. From this, design insights have 

been made regarding the importance of: 1) disciplinary experts; 2) precise vocabulary; and 3) active 

consideration of existing disciplinary curriculum requirements. 

Another important insight from work in low - and middle -income countries is that access to technology, 

the internet, and even electricity is highly varied. To ensure that students in these contexts are not further 

disadvantaged, the team has made provision for “unplugged” activities. These enable learners to meet the same 

learning objectives without relying on technology, supporting AI literacy education in a way that can be more 

inclusive and accessible regardless of local circumstances. 

# AI Quests : An educational game for AI literacy 

Google Research: Ronit Levavi Morad, Alon Harris, Liat Ben Rafael, Michael Madaio, Kevin Holst 

Stanford University and Stanford Accelerator for Learning: Victor R. Lee, Kristen Pilner Blair, Joba Adisa 

Phantom LLC: Ben Travis, Belle Moller, Andrew Shields, Zak Brown, Lois Hinx 

# Overview 

In 2024, Google Research conducted market research regarding in -class and on -line AI literacy programs and 

curricula, and identified a critical gap in the market: very few programs addressed applied AI and its real -world 

impact. Members of that team then a sked how they could leverage the impact -driven AI research across 

climate, health, and science to address this gap in a n engaging way for teens —the answer: AI Quests (Figure 2). 

AI Quests is a free, in -class, online and game -based digital learning experience designed to enhance AI literacy 

for middle school students (ages 11 -14). Developed by Google Research in partnership with the Stanford 

Accelerator for Learning & Phantom Studios, it pr ovides an accessible entry point into applied AI. After 

launching in September 2025, over 200 ,000 people completed AI quest s in the first 6 month s of release. 

Figure 2 

Introductory screen for AI Quests describing the digital context. 

In AI Quests , students explore the fundamentals of AI and its applications through a series of 

immersive adventures in a fantasy world where students face compelling problems inspired by genuine research 

projects at Google Research , tackling issues like climate change and public health. The goal of AI Quests is to 

empower the youth to understand how humans can design AI to solve some of humanity's biggest challenges. 

In the first quest , inspired by published “ Flood Forecasting ” research (e.g., Nevo et al., 2022; Nearing 

et al., 2023), students learn how AI can help predict floods by collecting relevant data sources, like rainfall and 

river flow, evaluating the quality of the data, and training and testing their model. Through v arious choice -based 

game mechanics, students learn how factors such as human judgment and data quality shape AI’s outputs and 

impact s—critical competencies of AI literacy (Long & Magerko, 2020). Another quest launched in December 

2025, which draws inspiration from an AI model developed by Google Research to detect a condition called 

diabetic retinopathy, which can lead to blindness (Bora et al., 2021; Varadarajan et al., 2020). A third quest will 

be released in 2026, which takes inspiration from “ Connectomics ” research to map and understand the human 

brain (Januszewski et al., 2018; Dorkenwald et al., 2023; Shapson -Coe et al., 2024). The benefit of using 

Google Research projects is the accessibility of experts who were part of the actual projects who can consu lt with the team on “what really happened” and help evaluate the ways in which the process of developing and 

deploying new AI in these contexts are represented. 

At the end of each quest, students receive a recorded video message from the real researchers behind 

the work about how they are using AI responsibly to address challenges faced by millions of people worldwide. 

This provides a different image of AI that go es beyond chatbot technology and represents what happens in AI 

research that works for social impact. Each quest also comes with a complete lesson plan and teacher guide, 

with pre - and post -game activities. 

Designed as a flexible, modular add -on to existing AI literacy curricula, AI Quests serves as a tool for 

educators and AI literacy programs seeking to introduce students to the practical application of AI and the 

reflective and sociotechnical thinking required in its development. 

# Partnerships 

For the realization of our vision for AI Quests we created a partnership “triad” between Google Research, 

Stanford Accelerator for Learning (SAL) , and Phantom Studios. SAL (USA) is a university -housed entity that 

includes faculty, staff, and students in partnership and practice -focused collaborations as part of university effort 

to further tighten the links between research - including specifically from the learning science s - and educational 

practice. Phantom Studios is a UK -based creative agency that develops digital experiences for clients and firms. 

Google Research funded and managed the project as a whole, selected the research projects, onboarded 

the respective Google research teams, and owned the product management and scaling strategy. SAL drove the 

pedagogy of both the online game experience as well as in -class teacher facilitation of that experience through 

the design of curriculum materials. Phantom drove the creative translation of the research subject matter into 

engaging and age -approp riate digital experiences. 

While there had been interest in helping students to see the nature of actual AI research in the context 

of social impact projects, there were clearly many possible new ideas for students to encounter. Through the 

partnership, a process for articulating le arning goals and the overarching design process was established based 

on Backwards Design (Wiggins & McTighe, 2005). As a new framework for some partners, this approach 

introduced from learning scientists helped to articulate the nature of the human -center ed focus - suggesting 

some backgrounding of technical terminology of AI that was deemed important to know but not part of the 

enduring understanding targeted. 

The partnership also allowed for further investigation of some of the game mechanics and story 

sequence design that had already been proposed and drafted. Learning sciences research and key principles were 

then introduced to frame discussion of game mechan ics, ultimately leading to specific strategies such as 

pedagogical agents - including teachable agents specifically (Blair et al., 2007) - and also encouraging 

interactions between player and characters that were inspired by the self -explanation effect (Ch i et al., 1994). 

Also key was the decision to create adaptable and educative lesson materials for teachers who would also be 

learning the content and learning pedagogy. Through these conversations, the partners began to establish a 

general framework for qu ests that include specific recurring types of pedagogical agents, specific features and 

representations for depicting data used in training of AI and the machine learning process, reflection and 

interaction types, and internal game structures that are inte rnally called “learning tickets” as they function as 

being like an exit ticket but are also intentionally moments that push for player reflection. Phantom Media had 

engaged in continuous player testing as the learning game experience went from storyboard t o a progressively 

refined interactive digital experience. 

# Insights 

Consistent with emerging literature on partnership research, there was multidirectional learning throughout the 

entire team (Goldman et al., 2022). Co -design took place through weekly meetings of the “triad” of Google 

Research, SAL, and Phantom Media. Each partner contributed distinct and essential expertise needed to bridge 

the AI literacy gap. The integration of these roles - industry expertise, learning sciences rigor, and creative 

production - was necessary to design and iterativ ely improve the experien ce as ideation moved into prototype 

and ultimately into the final product. 

The partnership introduced constraints that ultimately fostered creativity and productive compromise. 

One constraint has been the technical subject matter, drawing from real Google Research projects. Devising 

approximations of processes and practices that are accurate but intelligible has been an i terative process and also 

required continual return to backward s design principles. This is also shaped by knowledge about the target 

learners - middle school students aged 11 –14 - learning in a classroom context . There were some prior intuitions 

and play patterns (such as simply clicking through rather than engaging with the content) that needed to be 

observed and addressed strategically using expertise brought from all parties. Importantly, production constraints factored in with an accountability to release products that reflected the professional expertise that 

had been put into place, but had legitimate timeline and budgetary constraints that required compromises on 

what could be pursued. For example , some important learning effects can be realized in a one -on -one situation 

in a lab but would not be scalable without a trained researcher present - therefore, approximations had to be 

designed. In many respects, this reflects some of the inherent challen ges associated with design -based research 

in which real contexts shape what knowledge is practical and useful for the design task. 

The workflows to which each party was accustomed had to be renegotiated. For example, production 

teams value clear and complete specifications so they can organize their work internally. However, a 

collaboration like this in which many prototypes were subject to revision on the basis of different expertise (how 

the real -world project in which a quest was based is best represented, or what hidden caveats or considerations 

had to be integrated into a designed learning feature for it to be effective) necessita ted more production 

iterations than expected. 

# MIT App Inventor : Student -directed AI literacy learning through tool -building 

MIT: Marisol Diaz, Evan Patton, Selim Tezel, Robert Parks, Hal Abelson 

# Overview 

One core perspective for the design of digital learning experiences in the learning sciences has been 

Constructionism (Papert, 1980). Constructionism posits that learning takes place felicitously with the creation of 

a personally meaningful public artifact. Therefore, new expressive and digital media that allow for the 

generation of artifacts are especially valued so long as they provide opportunities for students to tinker, explore, 

create, and share their work and experiences. 

MIT App Inventor is a platform created with constructionist principles in mind (Pang et al., 2023). It 

leverages block -based coding environments , enabling students to build their own apps that run on mobile 

devices. Computational empowerment and computational action (Kafai et al., 2024) are primary platform goals; 

the platform developers and project leaders aspire to empower students to use computational tools and media in 

ways that help address lo cal concerns and bring about change for community betterment . As such, many users 

of MIT App Inventor are located around the world, with a large and growing user base in the Global South. 

While MIT App Inventor originated from broader aims to support computational literacy broadly, AI 

literacy has been embraced as highly relevant and aligned with the history and aims of the platform, which has 

longstanding connections to MIT’s CSAIL (Computer Science and Artific ial Intelligence Laboratory). Google 

has been a key resource for the platform, given the AI tools it has created. Now, students can create apps 

embedded with Gemini chatbots, Google Teachable Machine image classification (von Wangenh eim et al., 

2024), and other embedded mobile AI tools. 

Last year, students built over 300,000 novel apps embedded with AI functions in MIT App Inventor .

The target population had been educators and students in grades 5 -12, although some users are as young as 8 

years old, and some users are non -educator adults. The overall makeup of users is 84.9% students, 7.3% 

teachers, and 7.8% adults. 

Globally, teachers have used the free, open -source platform as a resource for student -directed learning 

in AI and coding, with 48% of MIT App Inventor users in classrooms in the Global South. The MIT App 

Inventor site is automatically translated for local use into 19 languages using Google web tools. For example, 

over 25.6% of our users are seeing the coding platform in Spanish. Students in Mexico are the 3rd largest user 

base at (8.4% of student users vs. 12. 9% U S). Brazilian students (3.6%) are reading t he site in Portuguese. 

# Partnerships 

Historically, Google has been a significant collaboration partner for MIT App Inventor , as the tool was 

incubated at Google during the project PI’s (Hal Abelson) academic sabbatical in 2010 with Google. Abelson 

then launched MIT App Inventor in collaboration with Google soon after. Some of the partnership work has 

involved supporting the integrations with Google products, such as the Android operating system for mobile 

devices, and using Google tools like Gemini and Teachable Machine .

A specific new initiative that further extends the relationship between MIT App Inventor involves 

working with more Latin American and Brazilian students (Figure 3). Google for Education LATAM provided 

support to initiate relationships with Latin American ministers of education. These ministers and Google for 

Education representatives then pa rticipated in the 2025 MIT AI + Education Summit. Through that summit, 

LATAM ministers were able to see projects created by young people from around the world and learn about 

programs and offerings affiliated with the MIT App Inventor team. The ministers have stated that they gained first -hand knowledge of AI literacy and new ideas for promoting student -directed app -making in schools. With 

the help of the Google for Education team, they have started to plan another initiative for the Education + AI 

Summit in 2026. Convenings such as t hese represent an important collaboration and direction for partnership, 

particularly as they gain the attention of decision -makers and leaders. Other units and representatives in Google 

who focus on Latin America, such as team members from Google Workspac e and Gemini for Education, also 

participated in the summit and conversations. In this regard, the nature of partnerships can span across teams in 

a single organization if they share a common focus ( e.g. , engaging with Latin America). 

Figure 3 

Teachers from Puerto Rico training about teaching AI literacy through mobile app -

building to educators from Latin America. 

It is important to acknowledge, however, that while Google has been an important partner, many 

partnerships and collaborations have been critical, such as with the App Inventor Foundation, Brazilian Creative 

Learning Network, CienciaPR, and the Scientific Caribbean Foundation. The larger network plays an important 

role in engaging with different audiences and providing resources for sustainability. 

# Insights 

The story behind the collaboration may help researchers see how pathways for such partnerships occur in the 

wild. The team started with the notion to provide workshops in Spanish and Portuguese at their l MIT AI + 

Education summit. But who would come? Summit organizers, who included many MIT App Inventor personnel, 

reached out to Google for Education LATAM to help create a network to assist in this effort. 

Shared interest from Google for Education LATAM led to monthly check -ins to provide feedback as 

the MIT summit program came together. Personal experience from having worked in Latin America on 

Google’s behalf was shared, which informed how to enhance the i nternational collaboration and provide a more 

enriching experience for the Latin -American ministers. For instance, some workshop program segments were 

restructured and extended in order to account for different backgrounds and likely questions from the LAT AM 

education ministers. 

Google provided both financial support and support in terms of international expertise to coordinate 

virtual educator PD sessions before the summit, as well as in -person visits to the summit from groups the App 

Inventor team has always wanted to reach, inc luding the Brazilian Creative Learning network (BCLN), Puerto 

Rican educators in CienciaPR, and the Scientific Caribbean Foundation. For instance, in June 2025, the App 

Inventor team conducted two weeks of AI literacy PD sessions on the topic of AI for Imp act. This is progressing 

to further collaborations. The MIT App Inventor team has since begun collaborating with BCLN to develop an 

App Inventor Day in Brazil in order to broaden outreach and participation. 

# New York Jobs CEO Council: A public sector partnership to enable AI literacy 

Jobs Council: Adam Blasioli 

Google Research: Michael Madaio 

# Overview Learner engagement and opportunity coordination within multiple groups within municipalities is a 

growing area of interest for learning sciences research (e.g., Ching et al., 2015; Pinkard, 2019; Taylor & Hall, 

2013). Ultimately, the challenge these resear chers address is how to leverage the resources residing across sites 

in a city in a way that promotes coherence and increases learning opportunities for learners. In this session, we 

share a collaboration that involves Google Research and the New York Jobs CEO Council . The New York Jobs 

CEO Council (Jobs Council) is an initiative to coordinate and unify New York City employment needs by 

encouraging new hiring practices (e.g., competency emphasis rather than credential emphasis) and to establish 

new learning and trainin g experiences for low -income job candidates to ensure they have current industry -

relevant skills. Membership includes leaders and representatives across area companies who are major 

employers in the city and committed to democratizing access to employment opportunities that drive economic 

mobility. AI literacy in the NYC area is a recent area of concentration for the Jobs Council, and takes the form 

of a five -part, in -person program where local college students learn about the fundamentals of generative AI. 

The course material has been developed in partnership with Google Research and other Jobs Council member 

companies and is intended to both demystify the technology and define AI literacy as a critical workforce skill. 

The primary objective of this partnership around AI literacy is to ensure City University of New York 

(CUNY) students have access to industry -backed training that provides a foundational understanding of GenAI 

and prepares job seekers for a rapidly evolvin g workplace (Figure 4). The target audience are CUNY students, 

particularly those outside of Computer Science majors. 

Figure 4. 

An in -person class hosted by the Jobs Council, covering the use of AI agents and Gen AI 

applications in the workplace 

Many of the students who participate are (1) low -income, (2) first -generation college students, and (3) 

seeking guidance on how best to skill themselves around GenAI. A particular challenge for this population is 

that messaging from their school administra tors and faculty is inconsistent around the usage of GenAI and has, 

at times, led to an erosion of trust between both parties. Not all students are gaining exposure or guidance on 

how to use AI for their academic experience nor how to prepare for future em ployment as AI changes the nature 

of work. The collaborators on this project work to develop students’ capacity to understand and use the 

technology and to reinforce its appli cation as a workforce skill necessary for future success. 

Since the launch of the pilot in 2024, participants have reported an increase in their knowledge of 

GenAI, their confidence in using emerging tools, and their ability to explain the technology to others. More 

importantly, the series has provided a chance t o address students’ fears around the technology, including its 

perceived biases and potential to eliminate jobs. Additionally, the program's early successes have built 

momentum on campuses to explore opportunities to scale this work - including by embeddin g content into 

university curricula - and efficiently reach more students annually. Google's partnership in this effort has helped 

to embed practical industry expertise into the coursework, and the availability of their existing AI Essentials 

programming i s offering a roadmap to expand and strengthen the delivery of this content to more students. 

Thus, earlier educational resources produced by other groups at Google, such as their public professional 

training subunit, “Grow with Google”, serve as a resource for the curricular planning. 

# Partnerships The primary differentiator for this partnership in comparison to the other projects shared in this symposium is 

the heavy involvement of multiple private companies who are members of the Jobs Council. The private 

companies, including Google, EY, JPMorganC hase, Amazon, and others, have supported the development of 

content for the series and made employees available to lead training sessions, speak on panels, and meet directly 

with students through the coursework. The curricula w ere developed by them (e.g., Google AI Essentials, EY 

Skills Passport), their employees have led the sessions (e.g., EY, PwC, JPMorgan Chase, AIG, ConEd), and the 

collaborators at Google Research and the Jobs Council have adapted the offering in real -time to reflect students' 

needs an d employer insights. 

In addition to private companies, this project involves public sector partners and higher education 

institutions. One public sector partner has been the Tech Talent Pipeline, an entity supported by the NYC 

Mayor's Office, that has supported the promotion o f this initiative and alignment to broader city -wide AI 

literacy efforts. Finally, the primary higher education partner has been CUNY which has both recruited students 

for this program, provided space to host the training sessions, and contributed to the i dentification of near -term 

needs and long -term scalable solutions. Each partner brings networks and specialized expertise to help aspects 

of the initiative align with practices and activities within other organizations. 

# Insights 

This project and its partnership offer a perspective on how higher education, government, and the private sector 

must work to coordinate goals and draw on complementary resources and expertise to create new pathways for 

learning at the city scale . This initiative sheds light on how public sector agencies (e.g., the Mayor’s Office of 

Workforce Development, and the Tech Talent Pipeline) can leverage their comprehensive view of AI -related 

employment trends and needs for particular skills around AI li teracy at the city -wide scale, to act as a hub to 

convene multiple private sector actors who may not otherwise have the capacity to act at a city scale. 

Meanwhile, this partnership also provides insight into how private sector employees can leverage their 

expertise about AI in the tech sector to inform an AI literacy curriculum and training, including how AI is 

currently being used in industry software dev elopment, knowledge of the AI competencies they look for when 

hiring, and the soft skills, or sociotechnical knowledge and skills about using AI at work. However, this effort 

raises questions about how best to support industry tech workers who are not trai ned as teachers in being 

equipped to effectively teach or facilitate training sessions for AI literacy. Future versions of this AI literacy 

initiative are being planned, drawing on lessons learned from the first year of pilots, including a train -the -traine r

model, recruiting CUNY alumni employed by partner companies, and plans to scale the program ’s reach .

# Significance of the symposium 

As the learning sciences examines and expands practices of partnership in service of advancing research and 

improving practice, this collection of projects advancing AI literacy with a common industry partner , but 

differing strategies for learner engagement , provides a unique opportunity to draw comparisons and contrasts of 

relevance to the field and for future learning sciences work that connects to the private sector. For instance, 

while there is one prominent company - Google - that is involved, the ensemb le of contributors shows how there 

are many different inroads for partnership made with many distinct sub -units housed in a single company. The 

global reach enabled by the company partnership allows for research that can have impacts across national 

boundaries , although that cross -national reach introduces new considerations and the need for even more 

collaborators . There are also important considerations of multiple goals and motivators, some aligned and some 

divergent, for designing and modifying learning experiences regarding AI literacy, worthy of consideration. 

Scale and networks of additional partners appear in this set of examples , and several of the contributions 

illustrate how the partnerships often require more than two partner organizations be involved. Ultimately, this 

collection of examples raises new questions for the field for what new knowledge is important to develop in 

order to enact change and to improve insight on how educational innovation is launched, adapted, and shared 

through privat e sector partnership , along with important considerations and tensions for future partnerships 

between learning scientists and other tech companies . In addition, we anticipate the attendees and discussion 

that takes place during the symposium amongst speakers and among attendees will uncover other notable 

qualities and features that can help all interested parties in developing partnerships that can simultaneously build 

knowledge and achieve impact. 

# Acknowledgements 

We want to thank all of our partners , as well as Yossi Matias for his strategic vision and support for AI lite racy .References 

Adisa, I. O., Mah, C., & Lee, V. R. (2025). High School Teachers’ Approaches for Integrating AI Literacy into 

Planned Instruction: Uniformity or Heterogeneity?. In Proceedings of the 19th International Conference 

of the Learning Sciences -ICLS 2025 , pp. 1545 -1549. International Society of the Learning Sciences. 

Blair, K., Schwartz, D. L., Biswas, G., & Leelawong, K. (2007). Pedagogical agents for learning by teaching: 

Teachable agents. Educational technology , 56 -61. 

Bora, A., Balasubramanian, S., Babenko, B., Virmani, S., Venugopalan, S., Mitani, A., ... & Bavishi, P. (2021). 

Predicting the risk of developing diabetic retinopathy using deep learning. The Lancet Digital Health, 

3(1), e10 -e19. 

Chi, M. T., De Leeuw, N., Chiu, M. H., & LaVancher, C. (1994). Eliciting self -explanations improves 

understanding. Cognitive science, 18 (3), 439 -477. 

Ching, D., Santo, R., Hoadley, C., & Peppler, K. (2015). On -Ramps, Lane Changes, Detours and Destinations: 

Building Connected Learning Pathways in Hive NYC through Brokering Future Learning Opportunities .

Hive Research Lab. 

Davis, E. A., Palincsar, A. S., Smith, P. S., Arias, A. M., & Kademian, S. M. (2017). Educative Curriculum 

Materials: Uptake, Impact, and Implications for Research and Design. Educational Researcher, 46 (6), 

293 -304. doi:10.3102/0013189X17727502 

Dorkenwald, S., Li, P. H., Januszewski, M., Berger, D. R., Maitin -Shepard, J., Bodor, A. L., ... & Jain, V. (2023). 

Multi -layered maps of neuropil with segmentation -guided contrastive learning. Nature Methods, 20 (12), 

2011 -2020. 

Edelson, D. C., Gordin, D. N., & Pea, R. D. (1999). Addressing the challenges of inquiry -based learning through 

technology and curriculum design Journal of the learning sciences, 8 (3/4), 391 -450. 

Goldman, S. R., Hmelo -Silver, C. E., & Kyza, E. Α. (2022). Collaborative design as a context for teacher and 

researcher learning: Introduction to the special issue. Cognition and Instruction, 40 (1), 1 -6. 

Holbert, N., & Wilensky, U. (2019). Designing Educational Video Games to Be Objects -to -Think -With. Journal 

of the learning sciences, 28 (1), 32 -72. doi:10.1080/10508406.2018.1487302 

Humburg, M., Han, A., Zheng, J., Rosé, C. P., Chao, J., Melo, N. A., ... & McBride, C. (2025). Humanizing AI 

for Education: Conversations with the JLS 2026 Special Issue Contributors. In Proceedings of the 19th 

International Conference of the Learning Sciences -ICLS 2025 , pp. 2269 -2277. International Society of 

the Learning Sciences. 

Januszewski, M., Kornfeld, J., Li, P. H., Pope, A., Blakely, T., Lindsey, L., ... & Jain, V. (2018). High -precision 

automated reconstruction of neurons with flood -filling networks. Nature methods, 15 (8), 605 -610. 

Jiang, S., Lee, V. R., & Rosenberg, J. M. (2022). Data science education across the disciplines: Underexamined 

opportunities for K‐12 innovation. British Journal of Educational Technology, 53 (5), 1073 -1079. 

Kafai, Y. B., Proctor, C., Cai, S., Castro, F., Delaney, V., DesPortes, K., ... & Rosé, C. (2024). What Does it Mean 

to be Literate in the Time of AI? Different Perspectives on Learning and Teaching AI Literacies in K -12 

Education. In Proceedings of the 2024 International Conference of the Learning Sciences , pp. 1856 -

1862, International Society of the Learning Sciences. 

Kim, J., Detrick, R., Lee, S. S., & Li, N. (2025). Impact of AI Literacy on Student -AI Interactions on Academic 

Writing. In Proceedings of the 19th International Conference of the Learning Sciences -ICLS 2025 , pp. 

1265 -1269. International Society of the Learning Sciences. 

Kramarczuk, K., Morey, J., Szabo, N., & Kedia, A. (2025). Empowering Undergraduate Computer Science 

Majors Through AI Literacy Research. In Proceedings of the 19th International Conference of the 

Learning Sciences -ICLS 2025 , pp. 440 -448. International Society of the Learning Sciences. 

Lee, V. R., & Long, D. (to appear). AI literacy: Perspectives underlying an essential new digital literacy In J. 

Castek, J. Coiro, E. Forzani, C. Kiili, M. S. Hagerman, & J. R. Sparks (Eds.), The International 

Handbook Of Research In Digital Literacies New York, NY: Routledge. 

Long, D., & Magerko, B. (2020, April). What is AI literacy? Competencies and design considerations. In 

Proceedings of the 2020 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems (pp. 1 -16). 

Miao, F., & Shiohira, K. (2024). AI competency framework for students . UNESCO Publishing. 

Mills, K., Ruiz, P., Lee, K. W., Coenraad, M., Fusco, J., Roschelle, J., & Weisgrau, J. (2024). AI Literacy: A 

Framework to Understand, Evaluate, and Use Emerging Technology. Digital Promise .

Nearing, G., Cohen, D., Dube, V., Gauch, M., Gilon, O., Harrigan, S., ... & Matias, Y. (2023). AI increases global 

access to reliable flood forecasts. arXiv preprint arXiv :2307.16104. Nevo, S., Morin, E., Gerzi Rosenthal, A., Metzger, A., Barshai, C., Weitzner, D., ... & Matias, Y. (2022). Flood 

forecasting with machine learning models in an operational framework. Hydrology and Earth System 

Sciences, 26 (15), 4013 -4032. 

Ng, D. T. K., Leung, J. K. L., Chu, S. K. W., & Qiao, M. S. (2021). Conceptualizing AI literacy: An exploratory 

review. Computers and Education: Artificial Intelligence, 2 , 100041. 

Nichols, T. P., Logan, C., & Garcia, A. (2025). Generative AI and the (Re)turn to Luddism. Learning, Media and 

Technology, 50 (3), 379 -392. doi:10.1080/17439884.2025.2452199 

O'Mahony, T. K., Vye, N. J., Bransford, J. D., Sanders, E. A., Stevens, R., Stephens, R. D., . . . Soleiman, M. K. 

(2011). A Comparison of Lecture -Based and Challenge -Based Learning in a Workplace Setting: Course 

Designs, Patterns of Interactivity, and Lea rning Outcomes. Journal of the learning sciences, 21 (1), 182 -

206. doi:10.1080/10508406.2011.611775 

Ocak, C., Han, S. C., & Caskurlu, S. (2025). Comparing Human and Machine Responses to Foster In -service 

Teachers’ AI Literacies. In Proceedings of the 19th International Conference of the Learning Sciences -

ICLS 2025 , pp. 1829 -1833. International Society of the Learning Sciences. 

Pang, H.N., Parks, R., Breazeal, C., & Abelson, H. (2023). The effect of computational action on students’ 

computational identity and self -efficacy, In Proceedings of EDULEARN23 , pp. 8404 -8412. 

Papert, S. (1980). Mindstorms: Children, Computers, and Powerful Ideas . Basic Books. 

Pinkard, N. (2019). Freedom of Movement: Defining, Researching, and Designing the Components of a Healthy 

Learning Ecosystem. Human Development, 62 (1 -2), 40 -65. doi:10.1159/000496075 

Rajapakse, C., Ariyarathna, W., & Selvakan, S. (2024). A self -efficacy theory -based study on the teachers’ 

readiness to teach artificial intelligence in public schools in Sri Lanka. ACM Transactions on Computing 

Education, 24 (4), 1 -25. 

Relmasira, S. C., Donaldson, J. P., & Lai, Y. C. (2024). Toward a Theory -Grounded Associative Model of AI 

Literacy. In Proceedings of the 18th International Conference of the Learning Sciences -ICLS 2024 , pp. 

2057 -2058. International Society of the Learning Sciences. 

Schank, R. C., Fano, A., Bell, B., & Jona, M. (1994). The design of goal -based scenarios. Journal of the learning 

sciences, 3 (4), 305 -345. 

Shapson -Coe, A., Januszewski, M., Berger, D. R., Pope, A., Wu, Y., Blakely, T., ... & Lichtman, J. W. (2024). A 

petavoxel fragment of human cerebral cortex reconstructed at nanoscale resolution . Science, 384 (6696), 

eadk4858. 

Tatar, C., McClure, J., Bickel, F., Ellis, R., Wiedemann, K., Chao, J., ... & Rosé, C. P. (2023). Examining high 

school students’ self -efficacy in machine learning practices. In Proceedings of the 17th International 

Conference of the Learning Sciences -ICLS 2023 , pp. 1434 -1437. International Society of the Learning 

Sciences. 

Taylor, K., Headrick, & Hall, R. (2013). Counter -Mapping the Neighborhood on Bicycles: Mobilizing Youth to 

Reimagine the City. Technology, Knowledge and Learning, 18 (1 -2), 56 -93. 

Tissenbaum, M., Sheldon, J., & Abelson, H. (2019). From computational thinking to computational action. 

Communications of the ACM, 62 (3), 34 -36. 

Varadarajan, A. V., Bavishi, P., Ruamviboonsuk, P., Chotcomwongse, P., Venugopalan, S., Narayanaswamy, A., 

... & Webster, D. R. (2020). Predicting optical coherence tomography -derived diabetic macular edema 

grades from fundus photographs using deep learnin g. Nature communications, 11 (1), 130. 

von Wangenheim, C. G., da Cruz Alves, N., Rauber, M.F., Mayor Martins, R., & Hauck, J. C. R. (2024). Creating 

mobile applications with artificial intelligence adopting computational action, In Papadakis, S., 

Kalogiannakis, M. (eds). Education, Development, and Intervention. Integrated Science, vol 23. 

Springer, Cham., 149 -165. 

Waite, J., Garside, B., Whyte, R., Kirby, D., & Sentance, S. (2024, October). Experience AI: Introducing AI/ML 

to Grade 6 –8 students in the UK. In Proceedings of the 2024 17th International Conference on 

Informatics in Schools (ISSEP’24) (pp. 28 -30). 

Waite, J., & Garside, B. (2023). From ethics to engines, framing AI Literacy (including Algorithm Literacy and 

Data Literacy) through the SEAME framework . Paper presented at 2024 UNESCO Global Education 

Meeting. 

Walsh, B., Dalton, B., Forsyth, S., Haberl, E., Smilack, J., Yeh, T., ... & Sengupta -Irving, T. (2022). Aspiring for 

equity: Perspectives from design of AI education. In Proceedings of the 16th International Conference 

of the Learning Sciences -ICLS 2022 , pp. 1771 -1778. International Society of the Learning Sciences. 

Wiggins, G., & McTighe, J. (2005). Understanding by design . Association for Supervision and Curriculum 

Development.