Title: Faithful Autoformalization via Roundtrip Verification and Repair

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.25031v1

Published Time: Wed, 29 Apr 2026 00:16:18 GMT

Number of Pages: 13

Markdown Content:
# Faithful Autoformalization via Roundtrip Verification and Repair 

Daneshvar Amrollahi †* Jerry Lopez Clark Barrett ††Stanford University, USA 

Abstract 

When an LLM formalizes natural language, how do we know the output is faithful? We pro-pose a roundtrip verification approach which does not require ground-truth annotations: for-malize a statement, translate the result back to natural language, re-formalize, and use a for-mal tool to check logical equivalence. When the two formalizations agree, this provides ev-idence of a faithful formalization. When they disagree, a diagnosis step identifies which trans-lation stage failed, and a targeted repair opera-tor attempts to correct that stage. We evaluate our approach on 150 traffic rules using Claude Opus 4.6 and GPT-5.2. Diagnosis-guided re-pair raises formal equivalence from 45–61% to 83–85% for both models, outperforming a random-repair baseline. An independent NLI analysis confirms that formal equivalence is correlated with less semantic drift. 

1 Introduction 

Autoformalization, the translation of natural-language statements into formal, machine-checkable representations, is a rapidly growing area of NLP research (Wu et al., 2022). Yet a fundamental question remains largely unaddressed: 

when an LLM produces a formalization, how do we know it faithfully captures the meaning of the original text? Existing evaluations rely on syntactic validity or downstream task success, neither of which directly tests semantic fidelity. Furthermore, when errors are found, repair is limited to end-to-end regeneration with no diagnosis of where meaning was lost (§2). We propose a framework that addresses both problems (verification and repair) without requiring ground-truth formalizations. The key idea is simple (Figure 1): given a natural-language specification 

x, we formalize it ( T1), translate the result back to natural language ( T2), and then re-formalize the  

> *Correspondence: daneshvar@cs.stanford.edu .

result ( T3). We call each of these translation steps a stage . If the pipeline preserves meaning, the initial and final formalizations should be semanti-cally equivalent. When they disagree, the point of divergence localizes the error to a specific stage, enabling both valuable diagnostic information as well as the possibility of scoped repair : attempting to correct only the faulty component rather than re-generating everything. The framework is agnostic to the choice of the formalism: it applies whenever a target formalism admits an equivalence check, e.g., automated reasoning tools for logical formu-las, type-checkers for proof assistants, test suites for code, etc. We evaluate the framework on 150 traffic rules from the Texas Transportation Code using two fron-tier LLMs, Claude Opus 4.6 (Anthropic) and GPT-5.2 (OpenAI). For our evaluation, we use a for-malization based on many-sorted first-order logic, checking equivalence with an SMT solver (Bar-rett et al., 2021). We additionally compare our diagnosis-guided repair against two ablation base-lines: no repair and repair based on random stage selection. The results yield two principal findings: 1. Roundtrip analysis helps distinguish faith-ful from unfaithful formalizations. When rules do not pass the formal equivalence check, this provides concrete evidence for and infor-mation about unfaithful formalization. On the other hand, rules that do pass the formal equivalence check exhibit lower semantic drift compared with those that fail, according to an independent NLI-based assessment. 2. Diagnosis-guided repair is both more effec-tive and more efficient than random stage selection. For both models, diagnosis-guided repair substantially improves the success rate of equivalence checking, outperforming repair with random error-stage selection. Claude’s full pipeline nearly doubles Random’s repair          

> arXiv:2604.25031v1 [cs.CL] 27 Apr 2026 xyorig
> x′
> yrt
> T1
> T2
> T3
> ≡Σ?
> Figure 1: Roundtrip loop. An input xis formalized (T1), reconstructed back to natural language ( T2), and re-formalized ( T3). The diagonal compares yorig and
> yrt for semantic equivalence under Σ.

count while reducing cost-per-repair by 41 % relative to random repair. Our contributions are: 1 (i) We propose aformalism-agnostic roundtrip verification frame-work that provides a signal on the truthfulness of autoformalization without requiring ground-truth formalizations. (ii) We introduce a stage-level di-agnosis and scoped repair procedure that localizes errors to individual translation steps. (iii) We con-duct a two-model empirical evaluation on 150 rules showing that diagnosis-guided repair outperforms random repair, while revealing that diagnosis qual-ity is model-dependent, a bottleneck that, when addressed (e.g., via cross-model diagnosis), could unlock further gains. 

2 Related Work 

Autoformalization, translating informal natural-language mathematics into formal, machine-checkable representations, has attracted growing interest since Wu et al. (2022) showed that large language models can correctly formalize a sig-nificant portion of competition problems into Is-abelle/HOL. Subsequent benchmarks have produced large NL-formal corpora for proof assistants (Zheng et al., 2022; Azerbayev et al., 2023; Ying et al., 2024; Gao et al., 2024; Jiang et al., 2023a), and a parallel line uses prover or compiler feedback to improve autoformalization, e.g., for mapping informal proofs to formal sketches (Jiang et al., 2023b), for filtering candidates via Lean 4 diag-nostics (Lu et al., 2024), for retrieval-augmented proving (Yang et al., 2023), and for SMT-backed geometry formalization (Murphy et al., 2024). All 

> 1Code, data, and prompts will be released upon acceptance.

of these efforts either presuppose ground-truth for-malizations for evaluation or treat compiler accep-tance as a proxy for correctness. None of them directly tests whether an autoformalization faith-fully captures the meaning of the NL input when no ground-truth formalization exists. 

Verification-integrated repair. Several systems couple verification with repair: Clover checks mu-tual consistency among LLM-generated code, doc-strings, and formal annotations via a Dafny verifier (Sun et al., 2023), but it assumes the existence of the formalization from the start. ProofBridge itera-tively repairs Lean proofs from type-checker feed-back (Jana et al., 2025). DeepSeek-Prover-V1.5 uses RL with proof-assistant rewards (Xin et al., 2024). Self-debugging repairs code from execution results (Chen et al., 2023). These systems treat ver-ifier feedback as a binary accept/reject signal, but they do not diagnose which stage of a multi-step pipeline introduced the error. 

Faithfulness without ground truth. Round-trip correctness has been used as an evaluation signal in code generation when checking equivalence via test suites (Allamanis et al., 2024). In autoformaliza-tion, recent work uses re-informalization combined with consistency checks: Li et al. (2024) rank candi-dates using a mix of symbolic equivalence and em-bedding similarity over re-informalized text, while Chen et al. (2026) train a model to self-evaluate semantic fidelity and iteratively self-correct. These approaches target mathematics, where the target formalism provides a natural oracle (a stated the-orem can be type-checked against its proof). Reg-ulatory text offers no such oracle, motivating our use of formal SMT equivalence over the round-trip artifacts together with stage-level diagnosis and scoped repair, rather than candidate selection or single-pass self-correction. 

3 Roundtrip Autoformalization Framework 

Target formalism and notation. Let X denote the set of natural-language strings. We use Σ to represent the target formalism. The framework is agnostic to the specific choice of Σ: all that is required is for there to be a notion of well-formed expressions and a notion of formal equivalence. Let 

YΣ denote the set of well-formed Σ−expressions. We write ya ≡Σ yb when two formulas ya, y b ∈ Y Σ

are equivalent according to Σ. For example, Σcould be first-order logic with the standard notion of logical equivalence, or it could be a formalism based on dependent type theory such as that used by the Lean 4 theorem prover (de Moura and Ullrich, 2021). 

Three translation stages. We model roundtrip autoformalization as a composition of three trans-lation functions: 

T1 : X → Y Σ (1) 

T2 : YΣ → X (2) 

T3 : X → Y Σ (3) where T1 performs autoformalization , T2 performs 

back-translation , and T3 performs re-formalization .All three stages operate under the same fixed target formalism Σ. Each Ti is assumed to be stateless :successive calls are mutually independent, with no shared memory or parameter updates between stages. The framework is agnostic to how each Ti

is realized (e.g., an LLM, a rule-based translator, or a human annotator). Note that T1 and T3 share the same type: both translate from natural language strings to well-formed Σ expressions. We consider them distinct to maintain generality and also so that stage-level diagnosis and scoped repair can refer unambiguously to the pipeline stage at which an error originates. 

Roundtrip instance. Consider again Figure 1. Given an input x ∈ X , the roundtrip pipeline pro-duces: 

yorig = T1(x) ∈ Y Σ (4) 

x′ = T2(yorig ) ∈ X (5) 

yrt = T3(x′) ∈ Y Σ. (6) We refer to yorig as the original formalization and to yrt as the roundtrip formalization .

Why roundtrip? The roundtrip construction yields a verification signal without requiring ground-truth formalizations . If T1 faithfully cap-tures the meaning of x, then back-translating and re-formalizing should recover the same formal se-mantics. When the two formalizations disagree, the point of divergence localizes the error. 

Formal equivalence. The primary verification question is whether yorig ≡Σ yrt . If not, at least one translation stage has introduced or lost meaning, triggering a diagnosis step in which an LLM judge examines all four pipeline artifacts (x, y orig , x ′, y rt ) to identify the responsible stage and produce a scoped explanation for repair (§4). Note that if the roundtrip is consistent with the original (i.e., yorig ≡Σ yrt ), correctness is still not guaranteed: the pipeline may stabilize at a seman-tically different fixed point where both formaliza-tions agree yet neither faithfully represents x. We therefore treat formal consistency as necessary but not sufficient . In §5, we discuss how to supplement roundtrip verification with an additional NLI-based check. 

Syntactic well-formedness as prerequisite. Be-fore semantic equivalence can be checked, each formula must be syntactically valid according to 

Σ. LLM-generated formulas occasionally violate grammar or type constraints. We allow up to five LLM-based correction attempts per formula, which in our experience suffices to ensure that at least one parsable encoding is produced. 

4 Stage-Based Diagnosis and Iterative Repair 

When yorig ̸ ≡Σ yrt , the roundtrip instance is for-mally inconsistent, implying that at least one of the translation stages introduced semantic drift. How-ever, the equivalence test alone does not identify which stage is responsible. We therefore introduce a stage-based diagnosis and repair procedure that localizes the failure and applies a targeted repair operator (Figure 2). 

4.1 First-Failure Diagnosis First-failed stage. We view the pipeline as an ordered sequence of stages T1 ≺ T2 ≺ T3. In-tuitively, an error introduced earlier may propa-gate downstream, so we aim to identify the earli-est stage at which the pipeline ceases to preserve semantics. Formally specifying natural-language semantics is beyond the scope of this work. Instead, diagnosis operates over the observable artifacts 

(x, y orig , x ′, y rt ) and returns an index in {1, 2, 3}.

Diagnosis function. Let 

D : X × Y Σ × X × Y Σ → { 1, 2, 3} × E (7) be a diagnosis procedure which, given the roundtrip artifacts, predicts the first failed stage and produces an explanation e ∈ E , where E is the set of possible explanations. In our system, D is implemented as a constrained LLM-based judge and E is simply 

X , the set of natural language strings. We enforce a sequential checking protocol : D must examine stages strictly in order (first comparing x with yorig 

for Stage 1, then yorig with x′ for Stage 2, and finally x′ with yrt for Stage 3), halting at the first detected inconsistency. 

Scoped diagnostic reasoning. Critically, the ex-planation e returned by D is constrained to refer-ence only the artifacts relevant to the diagnosed stage. For instance, if Stage 2 is diagnosed as faulty, the explanation must describe the mismatch between yorig and x′ without mentioning x or yrt .This scoping ensures that the diagnostic feedback can be directly incorporated into the correspond-ing repair prompt without introducing confounding information from other pipeline stages. 

4.2 Targeted Repair Operators Repair operators. A key design principle is that repairing stage i invalidates all downstream arti-facts produced by later stages; after repair, we therefore regenerate all subsequent stages to main-tain a coherent pipeline state. Each repair operator receives the relevant artifacts together with the di-agnostic explanation e produced by D:

R1 : X × Y Σ × E → Y Σ (8) 

R2 : YΣ × X × E → X (9) 

R3 : X × Y Σ × E → Y Σ (10) where R1 repairs the original formalization, R2

repairs the reconstructed NL, and R3 repairs the roundtrip formalization. Each Ri is instantiated as an LLM call operating under the same target for-malism Σ. The diagnostic explanation e is injected into the repair prompt, instructing the model to ad-dress the specific issues identified during diagnosis rather than regenerating blindly. This feedback-driven design enables targeted corrections: the re-pair prompt explicitly states what semantic mis-match was detected, and the LLM is required to resolve that mismatch while preserving other as-pects of the encoding. 

4.3 Iterative Repair Loop Iterative procedure. We combine verification, diagnosis, and repair into an iterative loop that at-tempts to reach formal self-consistency within a bounded budget. Starting from (x, y orig , x ′, y rt ),we repeatedly: (i) check whether yorig ≡Σ yrt ,(ii) if not, diagnose the first-failed stage, apply the corresponding repair operator, and regenerate 

Algorithm 1 Roundtrip Verification and Stage-Based Repair 

Require: Natural-language input x ∈ X , formal-ism Σ, max iterations K 

> 1:

yorig ← T1(x) 

> 2:

x′ ← T2(yorig ) 

> 3:

yrt ← T3(x′) 

> 4:

for k = 1 to K do  

> 5:

if yorig ≡Σ yrt then  

> 6:

Return SUCCESS , (yorig , x ′, y rt ) 

> 7:

return  

> 8:

end if  

> 9:

i ← D(x, y orig , x ′, y rt ) {first-failed stage}  

> 10:

if i = 1 then  

> 11:

yorig ← R1(x, y orig ) 

> 12:

x′ ← T2(yorig ) 

> 13:

yrt ← T3(x′) 

> 14:

else if i = 2 then  

> 15:

x′ ← R2(yorig , x ′) 

> 16:

yrt ← T3(x′) 

> 17:

else if i = 3 then  

> 18:

yrt ← R3(x′, y rt ) 

> 19:

end if  

> 20:

end for  

> 21:

Return FAILURE , (yorig , x ′, y rt )

downstream artifacts. The loop terminates when equivalence is achieved (success) or after a fixed maximum number of iterations (failure). We reit-erate that when the procedure reports success, this does not guarantee correctness with respect to the original natural-language intent, but it does provide a measure of reassurance and confidence. 

5 Auxiliary Semantic Signal 

Bidirectional NLI as a semantic proxy. We use natural language inference (NLI) to compare the original rule x with the reconstructed natural-language description x′ = T2(yorig ). If the roundtrip preserves semantics, x and x′ should be mutually entailing: x entails x′ (nothing lost) and 

x′ entails x (nothing spuriously added). We opera-tionalize this using a BART-large model fine-tuned on MultiNLI (Lewis et al., 2020; Williams et al., 2018), computing entailment probabilities in both directions: 

E→ = P (entailment | x, x ′) (11) 

E← = P (entailment | x′, x ) (12) along with contradiction probabilities C→ and C←.x                     

> NL input yorig
> Formal
> x′
> NL reconstr.
> yrt
> Formal
> T1T2T3
> SMT Solver
> yorig ≡Σyrt ?
> ✓Equivalent
> UNSAT
> Diagnosis D
> (LLM judge)
> SAT
> stage i∈ { 1,2,3}+ expl. e
> R1
> x, y orig , e
> R2
> yorig , x ′, e
> R3
> x′, y rt , e
> if i=1 if i=2 if i=3

Figure 2: Unified framework: roundtrip autoformalization, verification, and repair. Top : the pipeline translates x

through three independent LLM calls ( T1, T 2, T 3). Middle : an SMT solver checks yorig ≡Σ yrt , where UNSAT 

confirms equivalence. Bottom : on SAT , the diagnosis function D identifies the first-failed stage i and produces a scoped explanation e. The corresponding repair operator Ri receives only the artifacts adjacent to stage i plus e

(ensuring stage independence), then downstream artifacts are regenerated via the original T stages (green dashed) before re-verification.                           

> Cmax ≥0.6
> Emin ≥0.7∧Cmax <0.2
> E→≥0.6∧E←<0.4
> E←≥0.6∧E→<0.4
> Emin ≥0.3∧Cmax <0.3
> Contradiction
> Equivalent
> Strengthened
> Weakened
> Related
> Unrelated
> yes
> yes
> yes
> yes
> yes
> no
> no
> no
> no
> no

Figure 3: NLI diagnostic decision tree (first match wins). Thresholds are conservative. Equivalent demands strong bidirectional entailment ( ≥ 0.7) with near-zero contra-diction ( ≤ 0.2), while Contradiction requires high con-flict ( ≥ 0.6). Because these categories serve as a post-hoc diagnostic rubric rather than an optimization target, the exact thresholds affect only the granularity of the analysis, not the behavior of the system. 

Diagnostic categories. We derive Emin =min( E→, E ←) for mutual entailment and Cmax =max( C→, C ←) for contradiction. Each rule pair is classified into one of six categories via the decision tree in Figure 3 (first match wins). The six cate-gories ( Contradiction , Equivalent , Strengthened ,

Weakened , Related , Unrelated ) capture not only whether meaning is preserved but how it drifts, a distinction that a binary test would obscure. 

Diagnostic, not supervisory. NLI scores are used only for post-hoc analysis , not as optimiza-tion targets. The repair loop (§4) operates solely on formal equivalence. NLI serves as an independent diagnostic lens, allowing us to ask: when formal self-consistency is achieved, does semantic fidelity follow? This separation avoids optimizing for a noisy proxy while still providing a meaningful sig-nal. In §7, we cross-tabulate formal equivalence with NLI categories to reveal where formal consis-tency diverges from semantic alignment. 

6 Experimental Setup 

6.1 Domain and Dataset From law to logic. We instantiate the framework on traffic law, a domain that combines natural-language ambiguity with precise operational re-quirements (Holzenberger et al., 2020; Blair-Stanek et al., 2023; Manas et al., 2024). Any statutory do-main admitting a formal equivalence check could serve equally well (§3). 

Traffic rule corpus. We evaluate on 150 rules drawn from the Texas Transportation Code. These rules govern vehicle behavior on roadways, cov-ering lane positioning, passing maneuvers, signal-ing requirements, speed limits, and interactions with special vehicles (e.g., streetcars, school buses, emergency vehicles). Each rule is expressed as a single natural-language sentence or short para-graph, ranging from simple directives to complex conditional statements. Each rule passes through our three-stage translation pipeline, and up to three repair iterations are appplied, with per-stage diag-nosis, 

6.2 Models and Configuration Formalism. A Satisfiability Modulo Theories 

(SMT) solver is a tool that can formally deter-mine whether a set of first-order formulas is satis-fiable (i.e., whether there exists an interpretation that makes all of the formulas true) with respect to some background theory T (Barrett et al., 2010). An SMT solver returns one of two verdicts: SAT 

(a satisfying interpretation exists) or UNSAT (no such interpretation exists). SMT solvers can check whether two formulas φ and ψ are logically equiv-alent (with respect to a theory T ), by checking the satisfiability of ¬(φ = ψ). If the result is 

> UNSAT

, no interpretation can distinguish the two formulas, certifying equivalence. If SAT , the solver can return a counterexample demonstrating the dif-ference. We hand-write a domain schema , a set of SMT declarations and definitions that provide a fixed vocabulary for talking about traffic rule concepts. 2 We use the Z3 SMT solver (de Moura and Bjørner, 2008) to check equivalence, and all queries resolve in under one second. 

Language models and repair. To assess frame-work generalizability across model families, we run the full pipeline with two frontier LLMs: Claude Opus 4.6 (Anthropic) and GPT-5.2 (OpenAI). Both use temperature 0.3. Each translation stage (T1, T2, T3) and repair operator ( R1, R2, R3) is realized as a single stateless LLM call. The do-main schema is injected into every prompt, and no context is carried between calls. All stages and op-erators use the same prompts for both models. The iterative repair loop (§4) runs for at most K = 3 

iterations per rule. This budget balances repair opportunity against computational cost. Runtime details are in Appendix D. 

NLI model. For semantic comparison between original and reconstructed natural language, we use BART-large fine-tuned on MultiNLI (facebook/bart-large-mnli ). Inference is per-formed bidirectionally as described in §5. 

> 2The full domain schema is provided in Appendix C.

6.3 Ablation Conditions 

To isolate the contribution of diagnosis-guided stage selection, we compare three approaches: 1. No Repair (Baseline 0): The roundtrip pipeline runs without any repair loop. The initial equivalence check result is final. 2. Random Stage (Baseline 1): The repair loop runs for up to K=3 iterations, but at each iter-ation a random stage i ∈ { 1, 2, 3} is selected for repair (no diagnosis). The repair operator still receives the relevant artifacts and regen-erates downstream stages. 3. Full (Ours): We use the complete pipeline with diagnosis (§4.1) followed by targeted re-pair of the diagnosed stage. This is the system described in Algorithm 1. All three approaches share the same initial roundtrip pass (identical yorig , x ′, y rt ). They differ only in the repair strategy applied to rules where the initial equivalence check returns SAT. 

7 Results and Analysis 

7.1 Roundtrip Equivalence and Repair 

Table 1 summarizes the roundtrip pipeline out-comes for both models. Before any repair, the two models differ markedly in initial self-consistency: GPT achieves 92/150 (61.3 %) while Claude starts at 67/150 (44.7 %), leaving a repair pool of 58 rules for GPT versus 83 for Claude. Diagnosis-guided repair is effective for both: Claude’s Full repair approach raises equivalence from 44.7 % to 85.3 % ( +40.6%), and GPT’s from 61.3 % to 82.7 % ( +21.4%). Full outperforms Random in both models. Claude Full achieves 128/150 vs. Ran-dom’s 100/150 (61 vs. 33 repairs, a near-doubling), and GPT Full achieves 124/150 vs. Random’s 118/150 (32 vs. 26 repairs). The smaller gap for GPT reflects its smaller, harder residual pool due to its higher initial accuracy. 

Efficiency. For Claude, Full achieves 85 % more repairs than Random with only 8.6 % more LLM calls, reducing cost-per-repair by 41 % (7.21 vs. 12.27). For GPT, cost-per-repair is higher under Full (14.56 vs. 9.77) because its T1-concentrated diagnosis (§7.3) triggers full downstream regener-ation. Crucially, Full repairs rules that Random cannot fix at any budget (Claude: 35 exclusive vs. 7; GPT: 15 vs. 9; Figure 5). Claude Opus 4.6 GPT-5.2 None Random Full (Ours) None Random Full (Ours) 

Initial UNSAT 67 (44.7 %) 92 (61.3 %) Initial SAT 83 58 Repair successes — 33 61 — 26 32 

After 1 iteration — 19 34 — 19 19 After 2 iterations — 11 18 — 5 10 After 3 iterations — 3 9 — 2 3Repair failures 83 50 22 58 32 26 Total LLM calls 0 405 440 0 254 466 Calls / repair — 12.27 7.21 — 9.77 14.56 

Final UNSAT 67 (44.7 %) 100 (66.7 %) 128 (85.3 %) 92 (61.3 %) 118 (78.7 %) 124 (82.7 %) 

Table 1: Roundtrip equivalence and repair outcomes for 150 rules across three repair approaches and two models. Full repair achieves the highest final equivalence rate for both models. Claude benefits most from diagnosis: Full nearly doubles Random’s repair count (61 vs. 33) at 41 % lower cost-per-repair. Pre 1 2 3   

> Repair iteration
> 70
> 80
> 90
> 100
> 110
> 120
> 130
> Cumulative UNSAT rules
> Claude Opus 4.6
> No Repair
> Random
> Full (Ours)
> Pre 123
> Repair iteration
> 95
> 100
> 105
> 110
> 115
> 120
> 125
> Cumulative UNSAT rules
> GPT-5.2
> No Repair
> Random
> Full (Ours)

Figure 4: Cumulative UNSAT rules per iteration for Claude (left) and GPT (right). Full repair dominates at every iteration in both models. 

7.2 Per-Iteration Repair Progress 

Figure 4 shows the cumulative UNSAT count after each repair iteration for both models. For Claude, Full repair fixes 34 rules in the first iteration alone, exceeding Random’s entire three-iteration total of 33. The gap widens at every subsequent iteration. For GPT, both conditions fix 19 rules in iteration 1, consistent with the ceiling effect noted above, but Full pulls ahead in iterations 2–3 (10 + 3 = 13 ad-ditional) vs. Random (5 + 2 = 7), nearly doubling the later-iteration yield. 

7.3 Stage Diagnosis Distribution 

Diagnosis reveals strikingly different, and comple-mentary, error profiles across the two models (full breakdown in Table 3, Appendix E). Claude dis-tributes selections across all three stages ( T1: 25 %, 

T2: 21 %, T3: 55 %), with a T3 concentration that intensifies in later iterations (41 % at iteration 1, ris-ing to 71 % at iteration 3). GPT concentrates 83 % of its selections on T1, with near-zero T2 (3 %). In both cases, the Random baseline distributes ap-proximately uniformly ( ∼33 % each), confirming that the concentration is a property of the diagnosis 35 726   

> Full (Ours)
> Random
> Neither: 15 / 83 rules needing repair
> Claude Opus 4.6
> 15 917
> Full (Ours) Random
> Neither: 17 / 58 rules needing repair
> GPT-5.2

Figure 5: Repair overlap between Full and Random for Claude (left, 83 rules) and GPT (right, 58 rules). In both models, Full exclusively repairs more rules than Random. 

function, not the pipeline. GPT’s extreme T1 con-centration may reflect genuine initial-formalization errors or a first-stage bias in the sequential check-ing protocol, which examines T1 first and may de-fault to blaming the first stage inspected. 

7.4 Formal vs. Semantic Alignment 

Table 2 cross-tabulates solver verdicts with NLI diagnostic categories. In both models, Full repair produces more Equivalent and fewer Unrelated/-Contradiction classifications than Random (see Ap-pendix F for a distributional comparison). 

Formal equivalence and semantic fidelity. 

Among UNSAT (formally equivalent) rules, a non-trivial fraction exhibit semantic drift (NLI-Unrelated or NLI-Contradiction): Claude Full: 12/128 (9.4 %), Claude Random: 14/100 (14.0 %), GPT Full: 17/124 (13.7 %), GPT Random: 18/118 (15.3 %). Diagnosis-guided repair consistently pro-duces lower drift rates than Random, suggesting that targeting the correct stage also reduces mean-Claude Opus 4.6 GPT-5.2 Eq Re St Wk Un Co Eq Re St Wk Un Co                                                           

> Full UNSAT 73 13 24 64866 12 14 15 98Full SAT 13 1411210 24154Random UNSAT 55 718 610 462 12 12 14 99Random SAT 21 5865512 34463
> Table 2: Post-repair cross-tabulation of formal verdict and NLI category for both models. Eq = Equivalent, Re = Related, St = Strengthened, Wk = Weakened, Un = Unrelated, Co = Contradiction. In UNSAT rows, shading indicates semantic quality: faithful , partial drift , unrelated , contradiction .

ing loss. These drift rates are nonetheless lower than among SAT (formally inconsistent) rules. For-mal equivalence does not guarantee fidelity, but it correlates with less semantic drift. 

Manual inspection of NLI drift flags. To assess the reliability of the NLI diagnostic, we manually inspected a handful of UNSAT rules flagged as Contradiction or Unrelated across both models (ex-amples in Appendix F). A minority are NLI false positives : the original and reconstructed rules are operationally equivalent, but the NLI model treats the lexical gap between legal phrasing (e.g., “shall yield the right-of-way”) and the schema’s oper-ational vocabulary (“must not enter the intersec-tion”) as a contradiction ( Cmax ≥ 0.8). The major-ity exhibit genuine semantic drift, most commonly negation or exception inversion, where an exemp-tion (“X does not apply when Y”) is back-translated as a positive restatement of the obligation. The ad-justed drift rate is therefore only modestly below the raw NLI figures, consistent with the lexical-overlap heuristics documented in adversarial NLI work (McCoy et al., 2019). 

7.5 Residual Failure Analysis 

We manually examined the 22 rules that resist re-pair under Claude Full after three iterations and identified three failure modes (some rules exhibit more than one). The dominant mode ( ∼14 rules) is 

schema vocabulary gaps : the diagnosis correctly identifies a missing semantic distinction, but repair cannot succeed because the required predicate does not exist in the domain schema. For example, r095 requires distinguishing “the ends of a safety zone” from generic proximity, but the schema offers only a single-argument distance predicate. Rules with exception clauses (“except momentarily to pick up or discharge a passenger”) fail similarly when no predicate captures the exception. The second mode ( ∼5 rules) is stage cycling : repairing one stage introduces or reveals a new error in the next, producing a 1→2→3 migration across iterations. These rules involve complex multi-clause condi-tions where each repair is locally correct but desta-bilizes a downstream encoding. The third mode (∼3 rules) is diagnosis fixation : the same stage is diagnosed in all three iterations, but the repair oper-ator re-introduces a variant of the same subtle error. These patterns suggest that increasing the repair budget alone is unlikely to resolve residual failures. The primary bottleneck is schema expressiveness (§8). 

8 Conclusion 

We presented a formalism-agnostic roundtrip verifi-cation and repair framework for autoformalization that requires no ground-truth annotations. Stage-level diagnosis localizes errors to individual trans-lation stages, enabling scoped repair rather than end-to-end regeneration. A two-model ablation on 150 traffic rules shows that diagnosis-guided repair outperforms random-stage baselines, reveal-ing two separable components: the stage-level re-pair architecture (validated by both models) and the LLM-based diagnosis (whose quality is model-dependent). Cross-tabulating solver verdicts with NLI analysis shows that formally self-consistent rules exhibit less semantic drift than inconsistent ones, and since the reconstruction is produced from the formalization alone, this lends evidence to-ward faithfulness. However, formal equivalence alone is not sufficient: a non-trivial fraction of self-consistent rules still show drift. A residual failure analysis (§7.5) identifies schema expressiveness as the primary bottleneck, motivating automated schema enrichment as a key direction for future work, alongside scaling to new domains, cross-model diagnosis, leveraging SMT solver counterex-amples to improve diagnosis, and integrating se-mantic checks into the repair loop. Limitations 

Generalizability across domains. All rules are drawn from a single statutory source (the Texas Transportation Code), and it remains an open ques-tion whether the patterns we observe (diagnosis concentrating on specific stages, the efficiency ad-vantage of targeted repair) transfer to structurally different domains. Moreover, our pipeline treats each rule as a self-contained unit. Legal and reg-ulatory texts frequently contain cross-references between provisions (e.g., “except as provided in Section 545.062”), and extending the framework to handle such inter-rule dependencies is a non-trivial challenge. 

Semi-automatic schema design. A fixed SMT-LIB schema is necessary because equivalence checking requires both formalizations to share a common vocabulary. Our schema was developed in a semi-automatic process: we manually authored an initial sketch on a smaller pilot set of rules, then used an LLM to propose additional sorts, predi-cates, and enumerated types for the full 150-rule corpus, and finally refined the result by hand to eliminate schema smells (e.g., redundant predi-cates). This effort was substantial and remains a labor-intensive component of the autoformalization pipeline. Fully automating schema construction, for instance by having an LLM iteratively propose and validate domain predicates, is an important direction for future work. 

Formal equivalence is necessary but not suffi-cient. The roundtrip check can detect inequiv-alence but cannot, on its own, guarantee that a formalization is faithful. Two formalizations may be logically equivalent yet both wrong in the same way, for example if T1 drops a conjunct and T3 re-produces the same omission. Our NLI cross-check (§5) provides partial mitigation, but it is an inde-pendent heuristic, not a formal guarantee. 

Risks 

Autoformalization outputs generated by this sys-tem, including those that pass roundtrip verifica-tion, should not be used in safety-critical appli-cations, including but not limited to autonomous systems, medical devices, or safety case documen-tation, without independent review by a qualified formal methods expert. 

Use of AI Assistants 

GitHub Copilot and Claude Code was carefully used to assist with code implementation, L ATEX for-matting, and paraphrasing during paper writing. All scientific content, experimental design, analy-sis, and claims are entirely the authors’ own. 

References                      

> Miltiadis Allamanis, Sheena Panthaplackel, and Pengcheng Yin. 2024. Unsupervised evaluation of code LLMs with round-trip correctness. Preprint ,arXiv:2402.08699. Zhangir Azerbayev, Bartosz Piotrowski, Hailey Schoelkopf, Edward W. Ayers, Dragomir Radev, and Jeremy Avigad. 2023. Proofnet: Autoformalizing and formally proving undergraduate-level mathemat-ics. ArXiv:2302.12433. Clark Barrett, Roberto Sebastiani, Sanjit Seshia, and Ce-sare Tinelli. 2021. Satisfiability modulo theories. In Armin Biere, Marijn J. H. Heule, Hans van Maaren, and Toby Walsh, editors, Handbook of Satisfiability, Second Edition , volume 336 of Frontiers in Artifi-cial Intelligence and Applications , chapter 33, pages 825–885. IOS Press. Clark Barrett, Aaron Stump, and Cesare Tinelli. 2010. The SMT-LIB standard: Version 2.0. In Proceedings of the 8th International Workshop on Satisfiability Modulo Theories .Andrew Blair-Stanek, Nils Holzenberger, and Benjamin Van Durme. 2023. Can GPT-3 perform statutory reasoning? In Proceedings of the International Con-ference on Artificial Intelligence and Law (ICAIL) .Guoxin Chen, Jing Wu, Xinjie Chen, Wayne Xin Zhao, Ruihua Song, Chengxi Li, Kai Fan, Dayiheng Liu, and Minpeng Liao. 2026. ReForm: Reflective aut-oformalization with prospective bounded sequence optimization. In International Conference on Learn-ing Representations (ICLR) .Xinyun Chen, Maxwell Lin, Nathanael Schärli, and Denny Zhou. 2023. Teaching large language models to self-debug. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.05128 .Leonardo de Moura and Nikolaj Bjørner. 2008. Z3: An efficient SMT solver. In Proceedings of the In-ternational Conference on Tools and Algorithms for the Construction and Analysis of Systems (TACAS) ,pages 337–340. Leonardo de Moura and Sebastian Ullrich. 2021. The Lean 4 theorem prover and programming language. In Automated Deduction – CADE 28 , pages 625–635. Springer. Guoxiong Gao, Yutong Wang, Jiedong Jiang, Qi Gao, Zihan Qin, Tianyi Xu, and Bin Dong. 2024. Herald: A natural language annotated lean 4 dataset. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.10878 .

Nils Holzenberger, Andrew Blair-Stanek, and Benjamin Van Durme. 2020. A dataset for statutory reasoning in tax law entailment and question answering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.05257 .Prithwish Jana, Kaan Kale, Ahmet Ege Tanriverdi, Cruise Song, Sriram Vishwanath, and Vijay Ganesh. 2025. ProofBridge: Auto-formalization of natural language proofs in Lean via joint embeddings. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.15681 .Albert Q. Jiang, Wenda Li, and Mateja Jamnik. 2023a. Multilingual mathematical autoformalization. ArXiv:2311.03755. Albert Q. Jiang, Sean Welleck, Jin Peng Zhou, Wenda Li, Jiacheng Liu, Mateja Jamnik, Timo-thée Lacroix, Yuhuai Wu, and Guillaume Lample. 2023b. Draft, sketch, and prove: Guiding formal theorem provers with informal proofs. In Inter-national Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) . ArXiv:2210.12283. Mike Lewis, Yinhan Liu, Naman Goyal, Marjan Ghazvininejad, Abdelrahman Mohamed, Omer Levy, Veselin Stoyanov, and Luke Zettlemoyer. 2020. BART: Denoising sequence-to-sequence pre-training for natural language generation, translation, and com-prehension. In ACL .Zenan Li, Yifan Wu, Zhaoyu Li, Xinming Wei, Xian Zhang, Fan Yang, and Xiaoxing Ma. 2024. Autofor-malize mathematical statements by symbolic equiv-alence and semantic consistency. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) .Jianqiao Lu, Zhengying Liu, Yingjia Wan, Yinya Huang, Haiming Wang, Zhicheng Yang, Jing Tang, and Zhi-jiang Guo. 2024. Process-driven autoformalization in Lean 4. ArXiv:2406.01940. Kumar Manas, Stefan Zwicklbauer, and Adrian Paschke. 2024. TR2MTL: LLM based framework for met-ric temporal logic formalization of traffic rules. ArXiv:2406.05709. Tom McCoy, Ellie Pavlick, and Tal Linzen. 2019. Right for the wrong reasons: Diagnosing syntactic heuris-tics in natural language inference. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL) , pages 3428–3448. Logan Murphy, Kaiyu Yang, Jialiang Sun, Zhaoyu Li, Anima Anandkumar, and Xujie Si. 2024. Autofor-malizing Euclidean geometry. In International Con-ference on Machine Learning (ICML) .Chuyue Sun, Ying Sheng, Oded Padon, and Clark Bar-rett. 2023. Clover: Closed-loop verifiable code gen-eration. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.17807 .Adina Williams, Nikita Nangia, and Samuel R. Bow-man. 2018. A broad-coverage challenge corpus for sentence understanding through inference. In 

NAACL .Yuhuai Wu, Albert Q. Jiang, Wenda Li, Markus N. Rabe, Charles Staats, Mateja Jamnik, and Christian Szegedy. 2022. Autoformalization with large lan-guage models. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) . ArXiv:2205.12615. Huajian Xin, Z.Z. Ren, Junxiao Song, Zhihong Shao, Wanjia Zhao, Haocheng Wang, Bo Liu, Liyue Zhang, Xuan Lu, Qiushi Du, and 1 others. 2024. DeepSeek-Prover-V1.5: Harnessing proof assistant feedback for reinforcement learning and Monte-Carlo tree search. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.08152 .Kaiyu Yang, Aidan M. Swope, Alex Gu, Rahul Chala-mala, Peiyang Song, Shixing Yu, Saad Godil, Ryan Prenger, and Anima Anandkumar. 2023. LeanDojo: Theorem proving with retrieval-augmented language models. In Advances in Neural Information Process-ing Systems (NeurIPS), Datasets and Benchmarks Track . ArXiv:2306.15626. Huaiyuan Ying, Zijian Wu, Yihan Geng, Jiayu Wang, Dahua Lin, and Kai Chen. 2024. Lean workbook: A large-scale lean problem set formalized from natural language math problems. ArXiv:2406.03847. Kunhao Zheng, Jesse Michael Han, and Stanislas Polu. 2022. MiniF2F: a cross-system benchmark for for-mal Olympiad-level mathematics. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) .ArXiv:2109.00110. 

A Worked Example: Stage 3 Repair 

We trace rule r127 from the Claude Opus 4.6 run end-to-end. This rule is initially SAT (non-equivalent), diagnosed as a Stage 3 ( T3) divergence, and repaired in a single iteration. 

Step 1: Original Natural Language 

> An operator may not drive over an unprotected fire hose on a street without the consent of the fire department official in command.

Step 2: Initial Formalization ( T1)

> (forall ((v Vehicle) (r Roadway) (t Int)) (=> (and (fire_hose_on_roadway r t) (not (fire_dept_consent v t))) (not (on_roadway v r t))))

The encoding is a straightforward prohibition: if a fire hose is present and the operator lacks consent, the vehicle must not be on that roadway. Stage 1 produces a plausible encoding. 

Step 3: Back-translation ( T2)

> An operator may not drive over a fire hose laid on a roadway unless the operator has obtained consent from the fire department.

The reconstructed text faithfully paraphrases the formula. Step 4: Re-formalization ( T3): the divergence 

(forall ((v Vehicle) (r Roadway) (t Int)) (=> (and (on_roadway v r t) (fire_hose_on_roadway r t) (not (fire_dept_consent v t))) (stopped v t))) 

The re-formalization changes the consequent :instead of prohibiting the vehicle from being on the roadway ( not (on_roadway . . . ) ), it requires the vehicle to be stopped ( stopped v t ). These are semantically different: the original rule says the operator may not drive over the hose at all, not that they must merely stop. A stopped vehicle on the roadway still violates the prohibition. 

Step 5: Equivalence Check 

The solver checks the satisfiability of ¬(yorig =

yrt ) and returns SAT : the two formulas are not equivalent. 

Step 6: Diagnosis 

The diagnosis step examines each stage in sequence and reports: 

FIRST FAILED STAGE : 3. The Reconstructed NL is a prohibition against driving over the fire hose. This should be encoded such that if a fire hose is on the roadway and the operator lacks consent, the operator must not be on that roadway, i.e. the consequent should be (not (on_roadway v r t)) . However, Phase 3 encodes the consequent as (stopped v t) , meaning the vehicle must be stopped. A stopped vehicle is not the same as a vehicle that is not on the roadway. The correct encoding should prohibit being on the roadway, rather than requiring a stop. 

Step 7: Repair 

The repair operator receives the reconstructed NL, the faulty T3 encoding, and the diagnosis. It pro-duces a corrected re-formalization that replaces 

(stopped v t) with (not (on_roadway v r t)) ,restoring the intended prohibition. The post-repair equivalence check returns UNSAT : the roundtrip is now self-consistent. 

B Prompt Templates 

The pipeline uses seven prompt templates (744 lines total): one each for T1, T2, T3, the di-agnosis function D, and three stage-specific re-pair operators R1, R2, R3. All prompts share a common structure: a system-level role descrip-tion, the domain schema injected verbatim, the relevant pipeline artifacts, and output-format con-straints. Below we reproduce the diagnosis prompt in abridged form. The full set will be released with the code under an MIT license. 

Listing 1: Diagnosis prompt (abridged).     

> You are analyzing a 3-arrow translation pipeline for converting natural language traffic rules into SMT-LIB specifications: ARROW 1: Original NL -> Phase 1 SMT ARROW 2: Phase 1 SMT -> Reconstructed NL ARROW 3: Reconstructed NL -> Phase 3 SMT Z3 returned SAT, meaning Phase 1 and Phase 3 encodings differ. Check the arrows ONE BY ONE in sequential order and identify the FIRST arrow where an error occurred. ARTIFACTS: Original NL: {original_nl} Phase 1 SMT: {phase1_smt} Reconstructed NL: {reconstructed_nl} Phase 3 SMT: {phase3_smt} Respond with: FIRST_FAILED_ARROW: [1, 2, or 3] REASONING: [Only reference artifacts relevant to the diagnosed arrow.]

Repair prompts additionally inject the diagnos-tic reasoning as a DIAGNOSTIC FEEDBACK field and instruct the model to “change ONLY what is neces-sary to address the specific problems identified.” 

C Schema Excerpt 

The domain ontology (626 lines of SMT-LIB) defines 7 uninterpreted sorts, 21 enumerated datatypes, and 186 function/predicate declarations. Below is a representative excerpt showing the core sorts and a sample of predicate declarations with their temporal semantics annotations. 

Listing 2: Domain schema (excerpt). 

> ; Core Sorts (declare-sort Vehicle 0) (declare-sort Lane 0) (declare-sort Roadway 0) (declare-sort Zone 0) (declare-sort Access 0) (declare-sort Crossing 0) (declare-sort Intersection 0) ; Vehicle attributes (declare-fun kind (Vehicle) VehicleKind) (declare-fun speed (Vehicle Int) Real) (declare-fun on_roadway (Vehicle Roadway Int) Bool) ; Roadway properties (declare-fun roadway_kind (Roadway) RoadwayKind) (declare-fun roadway_sufficient_width (Roadway) Bool) (declare-fun no_passing_kind (Roadway Int) NPKind) ; Relational predicates (temporal) ; DURATIVE: true while maneuver ongoing (declare-fun passing (Vehicle Vehicle Int) Bool) (declare-fun following (Vehicle Vehicle Int) Bool) ; INSTANT: true at specific time t only (declare-fun audible_signal (Vehicle Int) Bool)

The full schema (626 lines), all seven prompt templates (744 lines), per-rule run outputs, and evaluation scripts will be released upon publication Claude GPT Full Rand. Full Rand. 

T1 40/163 (25%) 68/200 (34%) 105/126 (83%) 42/131 (32%) 

T2 34/163 (21%) 69/200 (35%) 4/126 (3%) 39/131 (30%) 

T3 89/163 (55%) 63/200 (32%) 17/126 (14%) 50/131 (38%) 

Table 3: Stage selection distribution. Diagnosis reveals complementary error profiles: Claude concentrates on 

T3 (55 %), GPT on T1 (83 %), while Random is approx-imately uniform ( ∼33 %) in both. 

under an MIT license at an anonymized repository URL (to be de-anonymized upon acceptance). 

D Runtime 

Each model–condition pair requires hundreds of LLM calls: the baseline pipeline alone makes 450 calls (three translations × 150 rules, plus syntax-correction retries), and each repair condition adds several hundred more (e.g., 440 for Claude Full). Across two models and three conditions, the full ex-periment involves over 2,000 LLM calls. With a 10-second rate-limit delay between calls, the Claude baseline pipeline takes roughly 8 hours wall-clock. The repair phase adds 2–3 hours per condition. SMT equivalence checks are near-instantaneous (under 1 second per query). End-to-end cost is entirely dominated by LLM inference latency and rate limiting. 

Hardware and cost. All LLM inference was per-formed via commercial cloud API endpoints (An-thropic API for Claude Opus 4.6, OpenAI API for GPT-5.2). No local GPU resources were used. NLI inference (BART-large-MNLI) and SMT solving (Z3) were run on a single consumer laptop CPU (Apple M-series) and completed in under 10 min-utes for all 150 rules. We report cost in terms of call counts rather than dollar amounts, as API pricing varies by model and changes over time. 

Environmental impact. Our workload consists entirely of inference over a commercial API, with no model training or fine-tuning. 

E Stage Diagnosis Details 

Table 3 provides the full stage selection breakdown. For Claude, T3 concentration intensifies in later iterations: 41 % at iteration 1, 67 % at iteration 2, and 71 % at iteration 3 (Figure 6). For GPT, T1

dominates consistently across all iterations (84 %, 85 %, 79 %). Iter 1 Iter 2 Iter 3     

> 0
> 20
> 40
> 60
> 80
> 100
> % of selections
> Claude Opus 4.6 Full (Ours)
> T1
> T2
> T3
> Iter 1 Iter 2 Iter 3
> 0
> 20
> 40
> 60
> 80
> 100
> % of selections
> GPT-5.2 Full (Ours)
> T1
> T2
> T3

Figure 6: Per-iteration stage selection (Full condition) for Claude (left) and GPT (right). Claude increasingly targets T3, while GPT consistently targets T1.Eq Re St Wk Un Co      

> 0
> 20
> 40
> 60
> 80
> Number of rules
> Claude Opus 4.6
> Full (Ours)
> Random
> Eq Re St Wk Un Co
> Number of rules
> GPT-5.2
> Full (Ours)
> Random

Figure 7: NLI category distribution for Claude (left) and GPT (right). Full achieves more Equivalent and fewer Weakened/Unrelated outcomes in both models. 

F Additional NLI Analysis 

Figure 7 compares the NLI category distributions across conditions. For Claude, Full achieves 86 Equivalent classifications vs. Random’s 76, while producing fewer Weakened (7 vs. 12) and Unre-lated (5 vs. 15) outcomes. For GPT, the distribu-tions are closer (76 vs. 74 Equivalent), consistent with its smaller repair pool. 

Manual inspection of NLI drift flags. We man-ually inspected a handful of UNSAT rules that the NLI diagnostic flagged as Contradiction or Unrelated across both models and ablation condi-tions. For each pair, a human annotator compared the original natural-language rule with the back-translated reconstruction and judged whether the NLI flag reflected genuine semantic drift or was a false positive (i.e., the pair is operationally equiv-alent despite low lexical overlap). Table 4 shows representative examples of each verdict. Aggregate observations are discussed in §7.4. 

G Data Availability 

The 150-rule evaluation corpus is derived from the Texas Transportation Code, a public-domain statutory text published by the Texas Legislature. 3

As a U.S. state government–authored statute, the source text is not subject to copyright. 

> 3

https://statutes.capitol.texas.gov Rule Original NL Reconstructed NL Verdict 

r071 An operator approaching an intersection con-trolled by a stop sign, after stopping, shall yield the right-of-way to a vehicle that has entered the intersection from another highway or that is ap-proaching so closely as to be an immediate hazard. An operator who has stopped at a stop sign– controlled intersection must not enter the intersec-tion if another vehicle is already in the intersection or constitutes an immediate hazard. FP (Cmax =0.84) r081 An operator emerging from an alley, driveway, or building, on entering the roadway, shall yield the right-of-way to an approaching vehicle. An operator emerging from an alley, driveway, or building onto a roadway and entering the main lane must maintain an assured clear distance from any other vehicle on that roadway. FP (Cmax =0.84) r140 The being-passed obligations (move right on sig-nal, no accelerating) do not apply when passing to the right is permitted. When a vehicle is passing another vehicle on a roadway and the passing is not on the right side, the vehicle being passed must not accelerate . . . and must move as close to the right edge of the roadway as practicable. Genuine (Cmax =0.94) 

Table 4: Representative UNSAT+Contradiction cases from manual inspection. FP = NLI false positive (pair is operationally equivalent, e.g., “yield right-of-way” ≈ “must not enter / assured clear distance”). Genuine = confirmed semantic drift. 

The full annotated dataset (comprising original natural-language rules, SMT-LIB encodings, back-translations, equivalence verdicts, stage diagnoses, repair traces, and NLI classifications) will be re-leased upon publication under an MIT license, to-gether with the pipeline code, prompt templates, and domain schema. An anonymized repository link will be provided for the camera-ready version.