Title: QFS-Composer: Query-focused summarization pipeline for less resourced languages

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.10687v1

Published Time: Tue, 14 Apr 2026 01:19:43 GMT

Number of Pages: 15

Markdown Content:
# QFS-Composer: Query-focused summarization pipeline for less resourced languages 

Vuk Duranovi ´ c 1, Marko Robnik ˇ Sikonja 1∗

> 1

Faculty of Computer and Information Science, University of Ljubljana, Slovenia 

Correspondence*: Marko Robnik ˇ Sikonja marko.robnik@fri.uni-lj.si 

ABSTRACT 

Large language models (LLMs) demonstrate strong performance in text summarization, yet their effectiveness drops significantly across languages with restricted training resources. This work addresses the challenge of query-focused summarization (QFS) in less-resourced languages, where labeled datasets and evaluation tools are limited. We present a novel QFS framework, QFS-Composer, that integrates query decomposition, question generation (QG), question an-swering (QA), and abstractive summarization to improve the factual alignment of a summary with user intent. We test our approach on the Slovenian language. To enable high-quality super-vision and evaluation, we develop the Slovenian QA and QG models based on a Slovene LLM and adapt evaluation approaches for reference-free summary evaluation. Empirical evaluation shows that the QA-guided summarization pipeline yields improved consistency and relevance over baseline LLMs. Our work establishes an extensible methodology for advancing QFS in less-resourced languages. 

> Keywords: summarization, large language models, less-resourced languages, question answering based evaluation, Slovene

1 INTRODUCTION 

In recent years, the world has witnessed rapid progress of generative artificial intelligence (AI) models capable of producing logical and complete units of text. Models like ChatGPT (Radford et al., 2018) and Llama (Dubey et al., 2024), which were trained on large amounts of data collected from the internet, have changed the way we work through their ability to respond to queries or prompts from human users. Although breakthroughs and improvements in large language models (LLMs) are made daily, the research community has noted differences in performance across languages. For example, the recent study by Robinson et al. (2023) showed that LLMs perform better in machine translation for languages that were highly represented in the training set, such as English, Chinese, and Spanish, compared to less-resourced languages. We aim to address this performance gap in query-focused summarization (QFS), also known as target-based summarization, a task in which the goal is to summarize a given text with respect to the query provided to the model. A common use case for QFS is in public relations and media press clipping, where companies are interested in how their firm is portrayed in a given text or how news may affect their business. 

1

> arXiv:2604.10687v1 [cs.CL] 12 Apr 2026

Duranovi ´ c & Robnik- ˇ Sikonja Query-focused summarization for less-resourced languages 

The crucial in our work is performance evaluation. For the summarization task, a common practice is to compare the LLM’s summary with a reference summary created by qualified human experts. Although this approach has its benefits when we want to train the model to respond in a certain style, the downside is that collecting reference summaries is a time-consuming and expensive process. Therefore, following other works on less-resourced languages, we resort to automatic reference-less evaluation metrics (Wang et al., 2020; Scialom et al., 2021; Mohammadshahi et al., 2023). However, most of these evaluation metrics were developed for English, and we need to adapt them for our language of choice. At a high level, contributions of this work are the following : 

• Our own QFS system called QFS-Composer that is based on question answering 1.

• Working QG 2and QA 3

• Translation of MOCHA dataset(Chen et al., 2020) to the Slovenian language 4

• Adaptation of QuestEval 5 QAGS 6, RQUGE 7 for evaluation of summaries in Slovene and comparison of summarization systems. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: In section 2, we present the related work. The third section introduces the QFS-Composer, the framework for target-based summarization and it’s components, as well as instructions for their development. In section 4, we evaluate our approach against baseline LLMs, and present results. The section 5 contains discussions about results, limitations of the approach and possible next steps in the research. 

2 RELATED WORK 

Our outline of related works starts with developments in extractive and abstraction summarization, and addresses also evaluation and components of QFS. We also shortly cover existing efforts in summarization for Slovene. With the increasing volume of text data published on the internet, the focus of many studies has been on finding efficient mechanisms to summarize extensive text documents. A comprehensive survey providing insights into recent works on this topic is provided by El-Kassas et al. (2021). Based on the approach, summarization methods are classified as either extractive or abstractive. Extractive methods rank sen-tences within the text based on their probability of being included in the summary, and then compose the summary by concatenating the top-ranked sentences into the output summary, without modifying them. On the other hand, abstractive methods focus on paraphrasing the main points of the observed document. Early extractive approaches relied on sentence-sentence similarity scores to select sentences for inclu-sion in a summary. Among these, Maximal Marginal Relevance (MMR) (Carbonell and Goldstein, 1998), achieved the best results by balancing each sentence’s relevance with the novelty it adds relative to the sentences already in the summary. Subsequent work explored graph-based methods such as TextRank (Mihalcea and Tarau, 2004), which represents sentences as vertices in a similarity graph and applies             

> 1The framework is available at GitHub repository: https://github.com/VukMNE/qfs-composer-paper
> 2QG model available at: https://huggingface.co/VukDju/GaMS-9B-Instruct-QG-Full-3ep
> 3QA model available at: https://huggingface.co/VukDju/GaMS-9B-Instruct-QA-3ep
> 4Dataset available at: https://github.com/VukMNE/MOCHA_slo
> 5QuestEval for the Slovenian language https://github.com/VukMNE/QuestEval
> 6Implementation is available inside the QFS-Composer repository, see footnote 1.
> 7RQUGE for the Slovenian language: https://github.com/VukMNE/RQUGE

Frontiers 2Duranovi ´ c & Robnik- ˇ Sikonja Query-focused summarization for less-resourced languages 

PageRank algorithm (Page et al., 1999) to select the most central ones. Another well-known example of a graph-based extractive text summarization technique is LexRank (Erkan and Radev, 2004), whose similarity measure uses TF-IDF-weighted cosine similarity, which accounts for term importance across documents. The graph construction in LexRank introduces thresholds for edge creation between sen-tences resulting in a sparser graph. A detailed overview of extractive methods is provided in a survey by Moratanch and Chitrakala (2017). Abstractive methods must not only identify the main points of the text, but also generate new wording based on those points. Consequently, they require more sophisticated architectures, such as neural net-works with an encoder–decoder architecture. Abstractive summarization has evolved from RNN-based sequence-to-sequence models that used attention mechanisms like the one presented by Rush et al. (2015), and has since shifted towards large-scale pre-trained transformers such as BART(Lewis et al., 2020), PE-GASUS (Zhang et al., 2020), and GPT variants (Radford et al., 2018). These LLMs produce smooth summaries that capture the meaning of the original text but rephrasing it. Some abstractive models suffer from the lack of named entity inclusion due to the design that requires them to paraphrase content, but the work by Berezin and Batura (2022) provides a way to overcome this problem. A comprehensive study of recent abstractive methods is provided by Zhang et al. (2022). The abstractive methods have to assure factual consistency of the summary with the original text, as LLM hallucinations can introduce information that is not present in the observed document. While extrac-tive methods ensure the generated summary contains salient parts of the source text, this approach may produce incoherent output. A hybrid approach called extractive-then-abstractive summarization (Liu et al., 2021; Tretyak and Stepanov, 2020) first extracts relevant sentences from the text using standard extractive methods and forwards them to an LLM to re-formulate them into a coherent summary. The extractive-abstractive approaches exists also in the field of QFS. The early approaches (Mohamed and Rajasekaran, 2006; Wan et al., 2007) were based on extractive methods that compared the similarity of the texts’ salient segments with the query, using a similarity score. Recently, abstrac-tive transformer-based methods have offered better comprehensiveness of the text. Sotudeh and Goharian (2024) implemented LTR (Learning To Rank) algorithm on a transformer architecture where decoder is shared by the summarization and LTR task. By forcing the same decoder to do both summarization and ranking of overlapping fixed-length segments, gradients from the ranking loss function push the decoder’s attention to focus on parts of the source document that belong to high-ranked segments. A graph-based approach GraphRAG (Edge et al., 2024) harnesses the power of LLMs to extract a knowledge-graph from a large corpus of text documents. The graph is partitioned hierarchically into nested communities of re-lated entities, and for every community the LLM produces a short report describing its entities, relations, and salient claims. This process, called ”Indexing”, is performed only once during the initial analysis of text corpora and when new data are inserted. When a user forwards a query to this system, the LLM reads community summaries generated in the indexing phase and reasons over them in order to create a response to the query. GraphRAG has a high commercial value because it allows businesses to utilize LLMs inside their organizations without exposing their private data to third parties. Query-focused summarization is highly overlapped with the question-answering (QA) task, sometimes referred to also as factoid text summarization. These question answering models are trained to output simple text units, often a group of words from the original text that are a correct answer to a question. A complementary task to QA is question generation (QG), where the model generates questions based on the observed document. A common approach is to pass the text to a named entity recognition (NER)   

> Frontiers 3Duranovi ´ c & Robnik- ˇ Sikonja Query-focused summarization for less-resourced languages

model, which then detects and extracts named entities present in the text, and then those named entities are fed to a QG model that creates questions using them. Both QG and QA are used in our QFS approach as building blocks of summarization models and for the evaluation of summaries. Fabbri et al. (2021) provides a thorough analysis of the correlation between human quality judgments and automatic reference-based evaluation metrics for summarization, such as ROUGE (Lin, 2004) (and its many variations), BERTscore (Zhang et al., 2019), BLEU (Papineni et al., 2002), etc. According to the authors, QAGS (Wang et al., 2020), a QA-based evaluation methodol-ogy, showed a stronger correlation with human preference than standard evaluation scores. QuestEval (Scialom et al., 2021), another approach to evaluation based on question generation and answering, which builds upon the QAGS framework, also showcased superior performance compared to ROUGE and other standard metrics based on comparison with the reference summaries. As high-quality summary should provide answers to multiple subquestions expressed in the users’ query, the focus of scientific research has been on decomposing the query into multiple questions or steps, ex-pressed in natural language, that the AI model should solve sequentially. Wolfson et al. (2020) introduced a Question Decomposition Meaning Representation (QDMR), a supervised approach for query decom-position by training a model that can parse their decomposed representation from the complex question. The idea behind QDMR is that AI models should break down complex queries into simple steps, where each step requires the model to find an answer in the source documents or within the text corpora it is trained on. The LLM should solve these QDMR subtasks sequentially, and answers to earlier questions are leveraged to solve later ones. For automatic text summarization in Slovene, ˇZagar and Robnik- ˇ Sikonja (2022) developed a cross-lingual transfer approach by aligning Slovenian embeddings with those of resource-rich English models. Other works adapted popular transformer-based models for summarization in Slovenian, e.g., SloT5 model (Ulˇ car and Robnik- ˇ Sikonja, 2023), architecturally based on Google’s T5 (Raffel et al., 2020). Re-cently, generative Slovene LLMs from the GaMS family (Generative models for Slovene) (Vreˇ s et al., 2024), based on Gemma (Team et al., 2024), achieved state-of-the-art results on the SloBench bench-marking platform. Finally, the SloMetaSumm ( ˇ Zagar and Robnik- ˇ Sikonja, 2023) system recommends the most suitable summarization model for a given text in the Slovene language. Development of these mod-els was supported by datasets extracted from large text corpora in the Slovenian language, such as KAS ( ˇ Zagar et al., 2022). Regarding the work in QFS, to the best of our knowledge, the only work is still preneural (Canhasi and Kononenko, 2014). 

3 MATERIALS AND METHODS 

3.1 QFS-Composer 

In this section we present the main components of our QFS system, named QFS-Composer. We start with the Query Decomposer, followed by a QA model paired with a span scorer, and end with an LLM that produces the final output. The main idea behind this architecture is to augment the original prompt and enforce factual consistency in model outputs. 

3.1.1 Query Decomposer 

Queries used in QFS can be broad, topic- or aspect-oriented, and sometimes more similar to a command or a request for information retrieval than to a real question. Moreover, a large portion of queries requires a response to multiple different subtasks or sub-questions. A frequent request in QFS is a comparison, or   

> Frontiers 4Duranovi ´ c & Robnik- ˇ Sikonja Query-focused summarization for less-resourced languages

a summarization of a document from the perspective of an entity mentioned in the text. Hence, we believe that the best way to provide a summary that satisfies all requests from the user’s query is to split the initial query into separate smaller tasks. After successfully decomposing the query, we forward the questions to the QA model to find answers in the source text, and pass the user’s query, along with extracted question-answer pairs, as an augmented prompt to the model, which will then generate a summary. Ideally, we would train a separate supervised model for query decomposition using a dataset specifically dedicated to that purpose, as in the QDMR system (Wolfson et al., 2020). Unfortunately, the QDMR query decomposition model was trained on the BREAK dataset, designed for multi-document setting that does not align with the focus of our research. Since it is not expected that such datasets would exist for less-resourced languages (we could not identify any such dataset for Slovene), we propose two possible workarounds. The first approach (called decomp aug in the experiments in Section 4.3) is to utilize an LLM with a specially designed few-shot prompt to decompose the query into multiple sub-questions. A possible downside of this approach is that the LLM could introduce questions that are very different from the type of questions present in the SQuAD dataset (used to train our QA component), which could consequently lead to QA model not being able to answer them. Nevertheless, we tried this approach and the prompt we designed for an LLM to decompose the user query is available in Appendix A. The second possible approach (called ner aug in the experiments in Section 4.3)) suitable for less-resourced languages is to employ a named entity recognition (NER) model that scans the user’s query and extracts entities for which our QG model subsequently generates questions. The downside of this approach is its limitation to named entities as the focus of summarization. As real world applications of QFS mostly use named entities, this is an acceptable limitation. In Section 4, we test both approaches and report the results. 

3.1.2 QA component 

An integral part of our summarization system is a question answering model. The purpose of this com-ponent is to emphasize the factual information from the source text that is relevant to the user’s query. QA component is utilized to answer the questions produced in the query decomposition, and the answers with the accompanying questions are merged with the user’s query and source text in the augmented prompt that is sent to the final answer generating LLM. As the base for our Slovene QA model, we utilized Slovene GaMS-9B-Instruct LLM, and fine-tuned it for three epochs over the Slovenian translation(Boroviˇ c et al., 2022) of SQuAD v2 dataset (Rajpurkar et al., 2018) The token-level cross-entropy loss function was optimized during training. The initial learning rate α was set to 2 × 10 −6. The learning rate schedule employed a linear warmup for 10% of the total training steps, followed by linear decay. We used per-device batch size 1 with 16× gradient ac-cumulation (effective batch size 16), AdamW (8-bit) as implemented in adamw bnb 8bit (with weight decay set to 0.01 and β1 = 0 .9, β2 = 0 .999 and ǫ = 10 −8), and gradient-norm clipping set to 0.1. Training ran in BF16 mixed precision, and the validation set evaluation was performed at the end of each epoch. The QA model was trained under the same computational setup, using a single NVIDIA A100 GPU (80 GB memory). The integration of the QA model into our architecture is not straightforward due to limitations from the training process. In particular, due to the memory constraints on our hardware, we cap the QA’s model   

> Frontiers 5Duranovi ´ c & Robnik- ˇ Sikonja Query-focused summarization for less-resourced languages

input length at 350 characters. Preliminary experiments with longer inputs resulted in frequent out-of-memory errors, so 350 characters was chosen as the maximum stable value across runs. This restriction means that the model without adjustments would not be able to answer a question when given a longer document as context, especially if the answer lies in the middle or the end of the document. To mitigate this issue, we split longer textual content into smaller chunks that the QA model could process. For each chunk, we compute BERTScore with respect to the question and sort the chunks in descending order by this score. We let the QA model answer only n top-ranked chunks for which the BERTScore is higher than threshold value of 0.85 , and we take the modal prediction as final answer to the question. If there is a tie, the answer from the chunk with a higher BERTScore is selected as the output. The BERTScore threshold of 0.85 was selected heuristically during the development phase based on manual inspection of several unrelated question–chunk pairs: values below 0.85 often admitted chunks that were only loosely related to the question, whereas higher thresholds tended to filter out relevant chunks. A more systematic ablation of the BERTScore threshold and the choice of n is left for future work. 

3.1.3 LLM for the final answer generation 

The final component in our pipeline is the LLM model that perform the summarization on the previously obtained information. The idea is that this LLM will produce better summaries if we provide it with the augmented query containing subquestions extracted from the query and the answers to those questions provided by the QA model using source document as context. The structure of the augmented prompt we send to the LLM is in Appendix A. In the following section, we validate our approach. We test four LLMs and compare the summary using solely the user’s query with the summary where the query is augmented with question-answer pairs. 

4 EVALUATION 

For less-resourced languages, evaluation methods that rely on reference summaries are usually off the table. Therefore, we resort to methods based on automatic question generation and answering, and first describe the adaptations of QuestEval (Scialom et al., 2021) and QAGS (Wang et al., 2020) to Slovene. Next, we describe our experimental settings and results. We end with the qualitative analysis of the results. 

4.1 QAGS 

The first step in QA evaluation framework QAGS is to extract K named entities from a summary. For each extracted named entity, the QG model forms questions in such a way that the extracted named entity is a correct answer to the generated question, conditioned on the summary. Next, the QA model answers the questions generated in previous step, but it answers them conditioned on the source text. After that, another set of answers is generated by the same QA model but using the candidate summary as the only context. Finally, a similarity metric is computed between pairs of answers for every question and their average is the returned score of the metric. 

4.2 QuestEval 

The QuestEval evaluation framework, in contrast to QAGS, generates two sets of questions instead of one. The first set of questions is created by QG model observing the generated summary solely (as is the case in QAGS), and then for that set of questions QA provides answers first conditioned on the summary,   

> Frontiers 6Duranovi ´ c & Robnik- ˇ Sikonja Query-focused summarization for less-resourced languages

and in the next step QA model produces answers by using the source document as the only context. The second set of questions is generated based on the entire original text, and then the QA model generates answers for each question by switching between the candidate summary and the source document as the only context. The novelty in the QuestEval framework, is the introduction of the Weighter component, that performs the task of assigning weights to each question generated from the original document based on its relevance to the text. The Weighter component enables QuestEval to factor in what amount the crucial information from the source is present in the summary. Additionally, the formula for computation of the QuestEval score features the Confidence of answerability, which represents the probability of QA model not predicting a special non-answerable token as answer to a specific question. In this way, if the QA model deems important questions from the source for which the answer exists within the document as unanswerable using the candidate summary as only context, the summary will be assigned a lower score. Finally, the output of the QuestEval is the F1 score, where the precision component measures consistency of the summary with the source text by comparing whether answers on the first set of questions differ when the QA model is conditioned on the summary or the original document. The recall component of QuestEval measures whether the summary contains the most important information from its source text, and is measured by comparing the answers on the second set of questions. The definition of the QuestEval’s recall component is given below. In hat formula, W (q, D ) is the weight assigned to question q by the pre-trained Weighter component, given the source document D. The ξ is ”unanswerable” token that needs to be included in the vocabulary of QA models, and (1 − QA(ξ|S, q )) 

part represents the probability with which the model predicts the question is answerable. Therefore, if a question generated on the source document is assigned a high weight, but the QA model is unable to answer the question given the summary, then it would lower the QuestEval score for that summary. 

Rec (D, S ) = 

∑

> q∈QG(D)

W (q, D )(1 − QA(ξ|S, q )) 

∑

> q∈QG(D)

W (q, D ) (1) 

4.3 The experimental setting 

To evaluate the effectiveness of our approach, we selected four LLMs to perform query-focused summa-rization. For every LLM selected as a summarizer model in our system, we utilize three different settings (see Section 3.1.1):  

> •

decomp aug - using another LLM to decompose the query into sub-questions that will be answered by QA component and in that way augment the prompt;  

> •

ner aug - NER model searches for named entities within the query, and forwards them to our QG model that creates questions using them;  

> •

no aug in which user’s query is passed straight to the LLM as it is. We use the following LLMs: GPT-4.1-mini, Gemma 2 9B-It, Llama 3.1 8B Instruct, and GaMS 9B Instruct. For the purpose of this evaluation, we collected a set of 21 texts in Slovene from popular Slovenian web news sources (delo.si, dnevnik.si, 24ur.com, siol.net). The summaries generated by models for every setting are first evaluated using QAGS and QuestEval frameworks, and later manually analyzed. While  

> Frontiers 7

Duranovi ´ c & Robnik- ˇ Sikonja Query-focused summarization for less-resourced languages 

the number of texts is low, it is sufficient to demonstrate the differences quantitatively and to allow for in-depth qualitative analysis. 

4.4 Quantitative evaluation 

The results of the automatic evaluation are discussed below: for QAGS they are presented in Table 1, while the QuestEval scores are presented in Table 3. The qualitative analysis follows in Section 4.5. The core of QA-based methods is to measure the similarity between answers generated using the entire original document as context and answers producing using the candidate summary as only context. In this work, the similarity between answers is measured using four different metrics: Exact match score (EM), 

F1-score, Edit Distance and BERTScore F1.The Exact match has value 1 if two strings (answers) are identical, meaning that all words in the answer are the same and appear in identical order. If there are any differences in the arrangement of words or phrasing, the Exact match yields 0 as the score of the metric for a given answer-pair. The F1 score in QA-based evaluation frameworks, is computed by measuring the number of overlapping unigrams between answer conditioned on the source document and the answer conditioned on the candidate summary. It is computed as a harmonic mean by utilizing values from precision and recall component. The Edit distance, sometimes also referred to as the Levenshtein distance measures the number of characters between two strings that need to be changed in order for strings to match. The authors of QAGS (Wang et al., 2020) reported their results using these three metrics. Finally, we decided to add BERTScore F1 which is also computed by comparing those sets of answers, to allow for differently phrased answers, but are similar in meaning (at least in high-dimensional embedded space), to be assigned higher scores. 

Table 1. Evaluation with QAGS framework across models and settings presenting the mean ± standard deviation. The best score across all models and metrics is in bold , and the best result per model is high-lighted with ........... underline ......... dashes.                                                                  

> Model QAGS Setting F1EM Edit Distance BERTScore F1
> gpt-4.1-mini
> no aug 0.164 ± 0.307 0.105 ± 0.306 45.505 ± 24.371 0.685 ± 0.356 decomp aug 0.253 ± 0.389 0.2 ± 0.4 .... .... 40.436 ... ± . .... ... 27.232 .... ... 0.732 . . ±... .... 0.331 ner aug ... .... 0.279 .. ±.. .... . 0.423 .... ... 0.245 . . ±... ... 0.43 42.436 ± 29.801 0.699 ± 0.366
> gemma-2-9b-it
> no aug 0.19 ± 0.349 0.133 ± 0.34 46.362 ± 25.687 0.614 ± 0.402 decomp aug ... .... 0.221 .. ±.. .... . 0.356 . .... .. 0.152 .. ±.... ... 0.359 .... .... 41.952 ... ± . .... ... 24.447 .... ... 0.756 . . ±... .... 0.291 ner aug 0.219 ± 0.355 0.143 ± 0.35 44.695 ± 24.285 0.751 ± 0.302
> Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct
> no aug 0.285 ± 0.368 0.162 ± 0.368 40.048 ± 24.401 0.773 ± 0.298 decomp aug 0.251 ± 0.355 0.133 ± 0.34 40.695 ± 23.832 0.738 ± 0.33 ner aug ... .... .... .... . 0.376 ± 0.429 . .... .... .... ... 0.286 ± 0.452 .... .... 36.724 ... ± . .... ... 27.814 .... .... .... .... 0.815 ± 0.261
> GaMS-9B-Instruct
> no aug 0.221 ± 0.326 0.105 ± 0.306 45.933 ± 23.472 0.672 ± 0.369 decomp aug 0.251 ± 0.362 0.162 ± 0.368 39.886 ± 25.221 0.739 ± 0.319 ner aug ... .... 0.322 .. ±.. .... . 0.401 . .... .. 0.209 .. ±.... ... 0.407 .... .... .... .... ... 36.305 ± 27.646 ... ... 0.784 . .. ± .. ... 0.29

Frontiers 8Duranovi ´ c & Robnik- ˇ Sikonja Query-focused summarization for less-resourced languages 

The best-performing model according to the QAGS scores is Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct with the ner aug 

setting, which uses named-entity extraction to split the query into simpler sub-questions, and it scored highest on three out of four metrics. By observing the performance indicators for this model, we can see that almost one-third of the text content for all the answer pairs matches exactly. The best result in the remaining category, Edit Distance, is achieved by GaMS-9B-Instruct , since for this metric the lower is better. Results clearly show that all models benefited from the information in augmented prompt retrieved by QG and QA models from source text, with the only exception occurring in case of Llama model where the model’s summary achieved better results when responding to plain query than with decomp aug setting. A detailed inspection shows that the technique that utilizes NER for splitting query into multiple sub-units outperforms in majority of cases the approach where another LLM is used for query decomposition. This is likely the consequence of the decomposer LLM (in our experiment, GPT 4.1 mini) introducing questions of different types when breaking down the query. This forces the QA model to answer types of questions it is not trained on, which results in less significant improvement of the summary. In the case of Gemma-2-9B model, using LLM-assisted query decomposition yielded better results according to all metrics, while for GPT-4.1 model, there is a tie between NER approach and LLM-assisted query decomposition. Additionally, the results for EM scores reflect the property of a Bernoulli distribution in which the mean is given by μ = p, where p is the probability that the summary-based and source-based responses tothe same question match, and the standard deviation is given by σ = √p(1 − p). Consequently, the observed standard deviations for EM are relatively large compared to the mean values, which is consistent with the discrete and high-variance nature of a binary outcome, such as word-level matching between two sets of answers. As QAGS evaluation showed that our QFS-Composer framework results in summaries that cover more information from the source document when using an augmented prompt, we checked whether this is a consequence of LLMs producing longer summaries when the prompt is longer. We analyze the length of generated summaries in terms of character count and word count. The results are displayed in Table 2. The analysis of the character- and word-level lengths of generated summaries contradicts our initial expectations. Specifically, summaries produced with augmented prompts were, on average, shorter than those generated from plain queries. The fact that QAGS assigns higher scores to shorter summaries generated with QA-assisted prompts demonstrates that our QFS-Composer successfully produces more concise summaries with greater infor-mation density than their counterparts generated by the same LLM answering plain query. Results in Table 2 show that Llama 3.1 8B-Instruct, is producing longer summaries compared to other LLMs when augmented prompt is used. This could partially explain why the model achieved the highest scores ac-cording to QAGS, because its longer output enables it to convey more information. On the other hand, the outcome of this experiment shows a limitation of QAGS: it doesn’t penalize for extra summary length or, conversely, reward shorter but information-dense summaries. The results of evaluating summaries using the QuestEval framework are displayed in Table 3. The best score is produced by the GaMS-9B-Instruct model in ner aug mode. We got higher QuestEval scores if we let the Weighter component assign equal weights to all questions, and if the confidence of answerability is computed based on the actual output of our QA model: 0 if the output is unanswerable token or empty string, and 1 if the output is non-empty and non-whitespace string. Additionally, due to the memory and time limitations, we have restricted the number of questions that  

> Frontiers 9

Duranovi ´ c & Robnik- ˇ Sikonja Query-focused summarization for less-resourced languages 

Table 2. Character-wise and word-wise length of summaries generated by different models and settings.                                       

> Model Setting Character count Word count
> gpt-4.1-mini
> no aug 2080.48 ± 954.39 284.19 ± 126.23 decomp aug 758.22 ± 214.46 103.95 ± 29.38 ner aug 850.09 ± 308.53 117.5 ± 41.81
> gemma-2-9b-it
> no aug 1256.61 ± 352.64 177.91 ± 47.04 decomp aug 555.67 ± 215.88 78.14 ± 28.98 ner aug 578.33 ± 188.37 82.76 ± 26.23
> Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct
> no aug 1327.62 ± 137.52 196.28 ± 20.80 decomp aug 1075.19 ± 318.52 157.24 ± 47.76 ner aug 1157.48 ± 258.18 171 ± 40.04
> GaMS-9B-Instruct
> no aug 1016.91 ± 450.55 145.57 ± 63.19 decomp aug 628.47 ± 257.39 91.81 ± 40.41 ner aug 610.14 ± 263.57 89.81 ± 36.79

will influence the computation of the final score in both precision and recall component of QuestEval to at most 10. In contrast to outcomes from the QAGS evaluation, the gains in QuestEval with augmented prompt are less pronounced, except in case of GaMS-9B-Instruct for which a noticeable improvement happens when query is processed with the NER technique. As this is the best performing model overall, we can conclude that query augmentation is successful according to QuestEval as well. Relatively low scores for all models and settings can be attributed to QuestEval’s dependency on exact matches between answer pairings. Often, LLMs use paraphrased expressions to describe the content of the original source, which, as a result, significantly degrades QuestEval’s ability to assign correct scores to perfectly valid summaries. Moreover, the QuestEval measures the coverage of important information from the original document within the summary, and if the summary is generated with respect to a query, some information may be intentionally left out. Finally, the limit we imposed on number of questions that participate in computation of the metric together with imperfect QA and QG models contributes to the lower final score. 

4.5 Qualitative analysis 

Analysis of numerical results from QAGS and QuestEval metrics is not sufficient to describe the overall behavior of the proposed QFS-Composer approach. Therefore, in this section, we take a closer look at summaries produced with ner aug technique for best-performing models GaMS-9B-Instruct and 

Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct and compare them to responses from the same models when there is no prompt augmentation. Upon examining summaries, we confirm that, in general, summaries generated with an augmented prompt are shorter, but more concise and information-dense than those generated with the plain approach. Notably, for queries in which the user wants to discover all instances of a certain phenomenon, or all 

Frontiers 10 Duranovi ´ c & Robnik- ˇ Sikonja Query-focused summarization for less-resourced languages 

Table 3. Evaluation with QuestEval framework across models and settings presenting the mean ± stan-dard deviation. The best score across all models and metrics is in bold , and the best result per model is highlighted with .......... underline ......... dashes.                          

> Model / Setting QuestEval (mean ± std)
> gpt-4.1-mini
> no aug .. .... . 0.351 ... ± .... ... 0.109 decomp aug 0.329 ± 0.113 ner aug 0.332 ± 0.112
> gemma-2-9b-it
> no aug 0.363 ± 0.087 decomp aug 0.363 ± 0.099 ner aug . .... . 0.374 ... ± .... ... 0.126
> Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct
> no aug 0.381 ± 0.119 decomp aug 0.348 ± 0.141 ner aug . .... . 0.389 ... ± .... ... 0.131
> GaMS-9B-Instruct
> no aug 0.386 ± 0.134 decomp aug 0.364 ± 0.150 ner aug . .... .... .... ... 0.427 ± 0.141

factors that influence a certain thing, the basic no aug approach yields a response in the form of an ordered list, while the augmented prompt approach yields plain text as output. We observe for GaMS-9B-Instruct that if a named entity is omitted from the query, it is less likely that the same entity will be mentioned in the summary. This claim is best supported by summaries for text with ID #2, which correctly respond to the query but lack informative named entities about who and where the experiment was performed. A review of augmented prompts utilized by models shows the limitations of the QA model. In certain cases, the QA model couldn’t find an answer to a question, although the answer definitely exists in the source text. The reason for this is that the QA model is not able to handle long texts all at once; instead, we have to split the document into chunks and rank them according to BERTScore, which is computed by comparing the chunks to the question. Hence, it is possible that a chunk not containing the answer is ranked the highest, which can lead to no output or wrong answers from the QA model. We detected that the same problem occurs in the evaluation phase. While manually inspecting model outputs, we found instances of LLM hallucinations. We observe that for the text in the interview form, model GaMS-9B-Instruct generated an off-topic response, while 

Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct hallucinated and stated that the fisherman indirectly suggested changes of the law which are completely opposite of the changes and complaints the fisherman actually talked about. 

5 DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION 

In our work we introduced a novel framework for query-focused summarization that we called QFS-Composer , and we demonstrated that by leveraging query decomposition and intra-document information 

Frontiers 11 Duranovi ´ c & Robnik- ˇ Sikonja Query-focused summarization for less-resourced languages 

retrieval using our question generation and answering models we were able to improve factual consistency and relevance of generated summaries compared to strong LLM baselines. Beyond experimental performance improvements, a central contribution of this work lies in the develop-ment of new assets in domain of the Slovenian NLP: QA and QG models optimized for factual supervision, translation of MOCHA dataset, and adapted metrics such as QAGS, QuestEval and RQUGE that are de-signed for reference-free summary evaluation. By combining these components within our framework we believe we have paved the way for more rigorous progress in summarization process for less-resourced languages. Additionally, by making these resources modular and reusable, we aim to encourage future research and downstream benchmarking. While our results show measurable gains, several challenges remain. First, our approach relies on query decomposition and QA model accuracy, meaning that any eventual errors in these stages propagate into the final task of summarization. Therefore, the future work should focus on improving precision of each of the sub-components of QFS-Composer. Furthermore, because of hardware constraints, our QA and QG model are able to process limited amounts of texts, which consequently forced us to split original document into smaller text segments. A viable path for future research should explore whether the performance of our framework would benefit if we could enlarge the amount of context models can handle at once. Furthermore, future work should also focus on collecting human ratings summaries generated with QFS-Composer and comparing them against summaries produced directly from user queries, in order to better quantify perceived usefulness and alignment with user expectations. By reducing the gap in linguistic resources between resource-rich and less-resourced languages, we believe this research contributes to a more inclusive NLP ecosystem, where speakers of less-resourced languages can benefit from advances in query-focused summarization technology. 

CONFLICT OF INTEREST STATEMENT 

The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest. 

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS 

Implementation: Vuk Duranovi´ c; Conceptualization: Marko Robnik- ˇ Sikonja; Data curation: Vuk 

Duranovi´ c; Investigation: Vuk Duranovi´ c, Marko Robnik- ˇ Sikonja; Methodology: Vuk Duranovi´ c, Marko Robnik- ˇ Sikonja; Supervision: Marko Robnik- ˇ Sikonja; Writing original draft: Vuk Duranovi´ c; Editing & Text improvements: Marko Robnik- ˇ Sikonja; Vuk Duranovi´ c; All authors approved the final submitted draft. 

FUNDING 

The work was primarily funded by the Slovene Research and Innovation Agency (ARIS) through projects GC-0002, L2-50070, and the ARIS core research programme P6-0411. Additional support was provided by the EU ERA Chair grant no. 101186647 (AI4DH).   

> Frontiers 12 Duranovi ´ c & Robnik- ˇ Sikonja Query-focused summarization for less-resourced languages

DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT 

The datasets analyzed for this study can be found in this repository https://github.com/VukMNE/qfs-composer-paper. 

REFERENCES 

Berezin, S. and Batura, T. (2022). Named entity inclusion in abstractive text summarization. In 

Proceedings of the Third Workshop on Scholarly Document Processing . 158–162 [Dataset] Boroviˇ c, M., ˇ Zagar, K., Ferme, M., Majninger, S., Ojsterˇ sek, M., ˇ Smajdek, U., et al. (2022). Slovene translation of the SQuAD2.0 dataset. Slovenian language resource repository CLARIN.SI Canhasi, E. and Kononenko, I. (2014). Weighted archetypal analysis of the multi-element graph for query-focused multi-document summarization. Expert systems with applications 41, 535–543 Carbonell, J. and Goldstein, J. (1998). The use of MMR, diversity-based reranking for reordering documents and producing summaries. In Proceedings of the 21st annual international ACM SIGIR conference on Research and development in information retrieval . 335–336 Chen, A., Stanovsky, G., Singh, S., and Gardner, M. (2020). MOCHA: A dataset for training and evalu-ating generative reading comprehension metrics. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) . 6521–6532 Dubey, A., Jauhri, A., Pandey, A., Kadian, A., Al-Dahle, A., Letman, A., et al. (2024). The Llama 3 Herd of Models . Tech. rep., Meta AI. Available at https://ai.meta.com/llama/ Edge, D., Trinh, H., Cheng, N., Bradley, J., Chao, A., Mody, A., et al. (2024). From Local to Global: A Graph RAG Approach to Query-Focused Summarization . Tech. rep., Microsoft Research. Available at https://aka.ms/graphrag El-Kassas, W. S., Salama, C. R., Rafea, A. A., and Mohamed, H. K. (2021). Automatic text summarization: A comprehensive survey. Expert systems with applications 165, 113679 Erkan, G. and Radev, D. R. (2004). LexRank: Graph-based lexical centrality as salience in text summarization. Journal of artificial intelligence research 22, 457–479 Fabbri, A. R., Kry´ sci´ nski, W., McCann, B., Xiong, C., Socher, R., and Radev, D. (2021). SummEval: Re-evaluating summarization evaluation. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics 9, 391–409 Lewis, M., Liu, Y., Goyal, N., Ghazvininejad, M., Mohamed, A., Levy, O., et al. (2020). BART: Denoising sequence-to-sequence pre-training for natural language generation, translation, and compre-hension. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics .7871–7880 Lin, C.-Y. (2004). ROUGE: A package for automatic evaluation of summaries. In Text Summarization Branches Out (Association for Computational Linguistics), 74–81 Liu, W., Gao, Y., Li, J., and Yang, Y. (2021). A combined extractive with abstractive model for summarization. IEEE Access 9, 43970–43980 Mihalcea, R. and Tarau, P. (2004). TextRank: Bringing order into text. In Proceedings of the 2004 conference on Empirical methods in natural language processing . 404–411 Mohamed, A. A. and Rajasekaran, S. (2006). Improving query-based summarization using document graphs. In 2006 IEEE international symposium on signal processing and information technology . 408– 410   

> Frontiers 13 Duranovi ´ c & Robnik- ˇ Sikonja Query-focused summarization for less-resourced languages

Mohammadshahi, A., Scialom, T., Yazdani, M., Yanki, P., Fan, A., Henderson, J., et al. (2023). RQUGE: Reference-free metric for evaluating question generation by answering the question. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2023 . 6845–6867 Moratanch, N. and Chitrakala, S. (2017). A survey on extractive text summarization. In 2017 International conference on computer, communication and signal processing (ICCCSP) (IEEE), 1–6 Page, L., Brin, S., Motwani, R., and Winograd, T. (1999). The PageRank citation ranking: Bringing order to the web. Tech. rep., Stanford infolab Papineni, K., Roukos, S., Ward, T., and Zhu, W.-J. (2002). BLEU: a method for automatic evaluation of machine translation. In Proceedings of the 40th annual meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics . 311–318 Radford, A., Narasimhan, K., Salimans, T., and Sutskever, I. (2018). Improving language understanding by generative pre-training. OpenAI Technical Report 

Raffel, C., Shazeer, N., Roberts, A., Lee, K., Narang, S., Matena, M., et al. (2020). Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text transformer. Journal of machine learning research 21, 1–67 Rajpurkar, P., Jia, R., and Liang, P. (2018). Know what you don’t know: Unanswerable questions for squad. In Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Papers) . 784–789 Robinson, N., Ogayo, P., Mortensen, D. R., and Neubig, G. (2023). ChatGPT MT: Competitive for high-(but not low-) resource languages. In Proceedings of the Eighth Conference on Machine Translation .392–418 Rush, A. M., Chopra, S., and Weston, J. (2015). A neural attention model for abstractive sentence summarization. In Proceedings of the 2015 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing . 379–389 Scialom, T., Dray, P.-A., Gallinari, P., Lamprier, S., Piwowarski, B., Staiano, J., et al. (2021). QuestEval: Summarization asks for fact-based evaluation. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing . 6594–6604 Sotudeh, S. and Goharian, N. (2024). Learning to rank salient content for query-focused summarization. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing . 15038– 15048 Team, G., Mesnard, T., Hardin, C., Dadashi, R., Bhupatiraju, S., Pathak, S., et al. (2024). Gemma: Open Models Based on Gemini Research and Technology . Tech. rep., Google DeepMind. Technical report Tretyak, V. and Stepanov, D. (2020). Combination of abstractive and extractive approaches for summarization of long scientific texts. CoRR abs/2006.05354 Ulˇ car, M. and Robnik- ˇ Sikonja, M. (2023). Sequence-to-sequence pretraining for a less-resourced Slovenian language. Frontiers in Artificial Intelligence 6, 932519 Vreˇ s, D., Boˇ ziˇ c, M., Potoˇ cnik, A., Martinˇ ciˇ c, T., and Robnik ˇ Sikonja, M. (2024). Generative model for less-resourced language with 1 billion parameters. Jezikovne tehnologije in digitalna humanistika ,485–511 Wan, X., Yang, J., Xiao, J., et al. (2007). Manifold-ranking based topic-focused multi-document summarization. In IJCAI . vol. 7, 2903–2908 Wang, A., Cho, K., and Lewis, M. (2020). Asking and answering questions to evaluate the factual consis-tency of summaries. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics   

> Frontiers 14 Duranovi ´ c & Robnik- ˇ Sikonja Query-focused summarization for less-resourced languages

Wolfson, T., Geva, M., Gupta, A., Gardner, M., Goldberg, Y., Deutch, D., et al. (2020). Break it down: A question understanding benchmark. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics 8, 183–198 [Dataset] ˇ Zagar, A., Kavaˇ s, M., Robnik- ˇ Sikonja, M., Erjavec, T., Fiˇ ser, D., Ljubeˇ si´ c, N., et al. (2022). Corpus of academic slovene KAS 2.0. Slovenian language resource repository CLARIN.SI ˇZagar, A. and Robnik- ˇ Sikonja, M. (2022). Cross-lingual transfer of abstractive summarizer to less-resource language. Journal of Intelligent Information Systems 58, 153–173 ˇZagar, A. and Robnik- ˇ Sikonja, M. (2023). One model to rule them all: Ranking Slovene summarizers. In 

International Conference on Text, Speech, and Dialogue . 15–24 Zhang, J., Zhao, Y., Saleh, M., and Liu, P. (2020). Pegasus: Pre-training with extracted gap-sentences for abstractive summarization. In International conference on machine learning (PMLR), 11328–11339 Zhang, M., Zhou, G., Yu, W., Huang, N., and Liu, W. (2022). A comprehensive survey of abstractive text summarization based on deep learning. Computational intelligence and neuroscience 2022, 7132226 Zhang, T., Kishore, V., Wu, F., Weinberger, K. Q., and Artzi, Y. (2019). BERTScore: Evaluating text generation with BERT. In International Conference on Learning Representations