Title: CARLA-Air: Fly Drones Inside a CARLA World -- A Unified Infrastructure for Air-Ground Embodied Intelligence

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.28032v1

Published Time: Tue, 31 Mar 2026 01:57:37 GMT

Number of Pages: 17

Markdown Content:
# CARLA -A IR : Fly Drones Inside a CARLA World A Unified Infrastructure for Air-Ground Embodied Intelligence 

## Tianle Zeng 1,∗ Hanxuan Chen 2,∗ Yanci Wen 1 Hong Zhang 1,†

Figure 1: Overview of CARLA-Air , a unified simulation infrastructure for air-ground embodied intelligence. The examples shown here illustrate representative capabilities of the platform, including unified air-ground simulation, multi-modal sensing, embodied navigation, asset adaptation, and diverse urban scenarios within a single physically coherent environment. 

# Abstract 

The convergence of low-altitude economies, embodied intelligence, and air-ground cooperative systems creates a growing need for simulation infrastructure capable of jointly modeling aerial and ground agents within a single physically coherent environment. Existing open-source platforms remain domain-segregated: urban driving sim-

> ∗

Equal contribution. †Corresponding author (hzhang@sustech.edu.cn). 

> 1

Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Robotics and Computer Vision, Southern University of Science and Technology. 

> 2

College of Electrical and Information Engineering, Hunan University. For questions and technical inquiries, please contact 

louiszeng16@163.com .

ulators provide rich traffic populations but no aerial dy-namics, while multirotor simulators offer physics-accurate flight but lack realistic ground scenes. Bridge-based co-simulation can connect heterogeneous backends, yet in-troduces synchronization overhead and cannot guarantee the strict spatial-temporal consistency required by modern perception and learning pipelines. We present CARLA-Air , an open-source infrastruc-ture that unifies high-fidelity urban driving and physics-accurate multirotor flight within a single Unreal Engine process, providing a practical simulation foundation for air-ground embodied intelligence research. The platform pre-serves both CARLA and AirSim native Python APIs and ROS 2 interfaces, enabling zero-modification reuse of exist-

> arXiv:2603.28032v1 [cs.RO] 30 Mar 2026

ing codebases. Within a shared physics tick and rendering pipeline, CARLA-Air delivers photorealistic urban and natural environments populated with rule-compliant traffic flow, socially-aware pedestrians, and aerodynamically con-sistent UAV dynamics, while synchronously capturing up to 18 sensor modalities—including RGB, depth, semantic segmentation, LiDAR, radar, IMU, GNSS, and barometry— across all aerial and ground platforms at each simulation tick. Building on this foundation, the platform provides out-of-the-box support for representative air-ground em-bodied intelligence workloads, spanning air-ground co-operation, embodied navigation and vision-language ac-tion, multi-modal perception and dataset construction, and reinforcement-learning-based policy training. An exten-sible asset pipeline further allows researchers to integrate custom robot platforms, UAV configurations, and envi-ronment maps into the shared simulation world. By in-heriting and extending the aerial simulation capabilities of AirSim—whose upstream development has been archived— CARLA-Air also ensures that this widely adopted flight stack continues to evolve within a modern, actively main-tained infrastructure. CARLA-Air is released with both prebuilt binaries and full source code to support immediate adoption: https: //github.com/louiszengCN/CarlaAir 

# 1 Introduction 

Three converging frontiers are reshaping autonomous sys-tems research. The low-altitude economy demands scal-able infrastructure for urban air mobility, drone logistics, and aerial inspection. Embodied intelligence requires agents that perceive and act in shared physical environ-ments through vision, language, and control. Air-ground cooperative systems bring these threads together, calling for heterogeneous robots that operate jointly across aerial and ground domains. Simulation is essential for advanc-ing all three frontiers, as real-world deployment is costly, safety-critical, and difficult to scale. Yet no widely adopted open-source platform provides a unified infrastructure ca-pable of jointly modeling aerial and ground agents within a single physically coherent environment. CARLA-Air is designed to fill this gap. 

The simulation landscape and its gap. Existing open-source simulators address complementary domains without overlap. CARLA [ 2 ], built on Unreal Engine 4 [ 3], has be-come the de facto standard for urban autonomous driving research, offering photorealistic environments, rich traffic populations, and a mature Python API. AirSim [ 15 ], also built on UE4, provides physics-accurate multirotor simula-tion with high-frequency dynamics and a comprehensive aerial sensor suite. The limitation of each platform is pre-    

> 14812 16
> 0
> 5
> 10
> 15
> 20
> 25
> Number of concurrent sensors
> Per-frame data transfer (ms)
> Bridge co-sim [17]
> CARLA-Air (ours)

Figure 2: Per-frame inter-process data transfer time as a function of concurrent sensor count. Bridge-based co-simulation [ 17 ] exhibits near-linear growth with sensor count due to cross-process serialization, while CARLA-Air remains effectively constant ( < 0.5 ms) owing to its single-process architecture. cisely the strength of the other: CARLA lacks aerial agents, while AirSim lacks realistic ground traffic and pedestrian interactions. Meanwhile, AirSim’s upstream development has been archived by its original maintainers, leaving a widely adopted flight simulation stack without an active evolution path. Other simulators across driving, UAV, and embodied AI domains similarly remain confined to a single agent modality (see Section 2 for a comprehensive survey). As a result, emerging workloads that span both air and ground domains—air-ground cooperation, cross-domain embodied navigation, joint multi-modal data collection, and cooperative reinforcement learning—lack a shared simulation foundation. 

Why not bridge-based co-simulation? A common workaround connects heterogeneous simulators through bridge-based co-simulation, typically via ROS 2 [ 9] or cus-tom message-passing interfaces. While functionally viable, such approaches introduce inter-process synchronization complexity, communication overhead, and duplicated ren-dering pipelines. More critically, independent simulation processes cannot guarantee strict spatial-temporal consis-tency across sensor streams—a requirement for percep-tion, learning, and evaluation in embodied intelligence systems. Fig. 2 quantifies the per-frame inter-process over-head contrast between bridge-based co-simulation and the single-process design adopted by CARLA-Air. 

CARLA-Air: a unified infrastructure for air-ground embodied intelligence. We present CARLA-Air , an open-source platform that integrates CARLA and AirSim within a single Unreal Engine process, purpose-built as a practical simulation foundation for air-ground embod-ied intelligence research. By inheriting and extending AirSim’s aerial simulation capabilities within a modern, 2actively maintained infrastructure, CARLA-Air also pro-vides a sustainable evolution path for the large body of existing AirSim-based research. Key capabilities of the platform include: (i) Single-process air-ground integration. CARLA-Air resolves a fundamental engine-level conflict— UE4 permits only one active game mode per world— through a composition-based design that inherits all ground simulation subsystems from CARLA while spawning AirSim’s aerial flight actor as a regular world entity. This yields a shared physics tick, a shared rendering pipeline, and strict spatial-temporal consistency across all sensor viewpoints. (ii) Full API compatibility and zero-modification code migration. Both CARLA and AirSim na-tive Python APIs and ROS 2 interfaces are fully pre-served, allowing existing research codebases to run on CARLA-Air without modification. (iii) Photorealistic, physically coherent simulation world. The platform delivers rich urban and nat-ural environments populated with rule-compliant traffic flow, socially-aware pedestrians, and aero-dynamically consistent multirotor dynamics, with synchronized capture of up to 18 sensor modalities across all aerial and ground platforms at each simu-lation tick. (iv) Extensible asset pipeline. Researchers can import custom robot platforms, UAV configurations, vehi-cles, and environment maps into the shared simula-tion world, enabling flexible construction of diverse air-ground interaction scenarios. Building on these capabilities, CARLA-Air provides out-of-the-box support for representative air-ground embodied intelligence workloads across four research directions: (a) Air-ground cooperation —heterogeneous aerial and ground agents coordinate within a shared environment for tasks such as cooperative surveillance, escort, and search-and-rescue. (b) Embodied navigation and vision-language action —agents navigate and act grounded in visual and lin-guistic input, leveraging both aerial overview and ground-level detail. (c) Multi-modal perception and dataset construction —synchronized aerial-ground sensor streams are col-lected at scale to build paired datasets for cross-view perception, 3D reconstruction, and scene understand-ing. (d) Reinforcement-learning-based policy training —agents learn cooperative or individual policies through closed-loop interaction in physically consistent air-ground environments. As a lightweight and practical infrastructure, CARLA-Air lowers the barrier for developing and evaluating air-ground embodied intelligence systems, and provides a unified simulation foundation for emerging applications in low-altitude robotics, cross-domain autonomy, and large-scale embodied AI research. 

# 2 Related Work 

Simulation platforms relevant to autonomous systems span autonomous driving, aerial robotics, joint co-simulation, and embodied AI. From the perspective of air-ground em-bodied intelligence, the central question is not whether a platform supports driving or flight in isolation, but whether aerial and ground agents can be jointly simulated within a unified, physically coherent, and practically usable envi-ronment. As illustrated in Fig. 3 and Table 1, existing open-source platforms largely remain separated by domain focus, and none simultaneously provides realistic urban traffic, socially-aware pedestrians, physics-based multirotor flight, preserved native APIs, and single-process execution in one shared simulation world. 

## 2.1 Autonomous Driving Simulators 

Autonomous driving simulators provide strong support for realistic urban scenes, traffic agents, and ground-vehicle perception. CARLA [ 2], built on Unreal Engine [ 3], has become the de facto open-source platform for urban driv-ing research due to its photorealistic environments, rich actor library, and mature Python API. LGSVL [ 13 ] of-fers full-stack integration with Autoware and Apollo on the Unity engine. SUMO [ 8] provides lightweight mi-croscopic traffic flow modeling. MetaDrive [ 7] enables procedural environment generation for generalizable RL, and VISTA [ 1] supports data-driven sensor-view synthe-sis for autonomous vehicles. These platforms collectively cover a broad range of ground-autonomy research needs, but none natively supports physics-based UAV flight, leav-ing air-ground cooperative workloads outside their scope. 

## 2.2 Aerial Vehicle Simulators 

Aerial simulators provide the complementary capability: accurate multirotor dynamics, onboard aerial sensing, and UAV-oriented control interfaces. AirSim [ 15 ] remains one of the most widely adopted open-source UAV sim-ulators, offering physics-accurate multirotor flight and a comprehensive sensor suite on Unreal Engine, though its 3upstream development has since been archived. Flight-mare [ 16 ] combines Unity-based photorealistic rendering with highly parallel dynamics for fast RL training. Flight-Goggles [ 5] provides photogrammetry-based environments for perception-driven aerial robotics. Gazebo [ 6], together with MAV-specific packages such as RotorS [ 4], offers a mature ROS-integrated simulation stack for multi-rotor control and state estimation. OmniDrones [ 19 ] and gym-pybullet-drones [ 12 ] target scalable, GPU-accelerated or lightweight RL-oriented multi-agent UAV training. While these systems are well suited to aerial autonomy in isola-tion, they generally lack realistic urban traffic populations, pedestrian interactions, and richly populated ground envi-ronments, limiting their use as infrastructure for air-ground cooperation or cross-domain data collection. 

## 2.3 Joint and Co-Simulation Platforms 

The most relevant prior efforts attempt to combine aerial and ground simulation through co-simulation. Tran-SimHub [ 17 ] connects CARLA with SUMO and aerial agents via a multi-process architecture supporting syn-chronized multi-view rendering. Other representative approaches include ROS-based pairings of AirSim with Gazebo [ 15 , 6, 9 ]. These systems demonstrate that het-erogeneous simulation backends can be functionally con-nected, but their integration typically depends on bridges, RPC layers, or message-passing middleware across in-dependent processes. As summarized in Table 2, such designs do not preserve a single rendering pipeline, do not provide strict shared-tick execution, and often require adapting existing code to new interfaces. By contrast, CARLA-Air integrates both simulation backends within a single Unreal Engine process, preserving both native APIs while maintaining a shared world state, shared renderer, and synchronized sensing—a system-level distinction de-tailed in Section 3. 

## 2.4 Embodied AI and Robot Learning Plat-forms 

Embodied AI platforms prioritize a different design ob-jective: scalable policy training rather than realistic ur-ban air-ground infrastructure. Isaac Lab [ 11 ] and Isaac Gym [ 10 ] emphasize massively parallel GPU-accelerated reinforcement learning for locomotion and manipulation. Habitat [ 14 ] and SAPIEN [ 18 ] target indoor navigation and articulated object interaction, while RoboSuite [ 20 ]focuses on tabletop manipulation benchmarks. These plat-forms are valuable for embodied intelligence research, but they do not provide the urban traffic realism, socially-aware pedestrian populations, or integrated aerial-ground simula-tion required by low-altitude cooperative robotics. In this sense, they address complementary research needs and are not direct substitutes for CARLA-Air. 

## 2.5 Summary 

Fig. 3 positions CARLA-Air and representative platforms along two principal design axes: simulation fidelity and agent domain breadth. Driving simulators provide realis-tic urban ground environments without aerial dynamics; UAV simulators provide flight realism without populated ground worlds; joint simulators generally rely on multi-process bridging that sacrifices interface compatibility or synchronization fidelity; and embodied AI platforms focus on scalable learning rather than air-ground infrastructure. CARLA-Air is designed to sit at the intersection of these domains, combining realistic urban traffic, socially-aware pedestrians, physics-based multirotor flight, preserved na-tive APIs, and single-process execution within one uni-fied simulation environment. Table 1 provides a detailed feature-level comparison across all platforms discussed above.  

> Agent Domain Breadth
> Simulation Fidelity
> Single domain Multi-domain
> Lightweight  High-fidelity  CARLA [2] Ground
> AirSim [15] Aerial
> FlightGoggles [5]
> Isaac Lab [11]
> Habitat [14]
> SUMO [8]
> TranSimHub [17]
> OmniDrones [19]
> MetaDrive [7]
> CARLA-Air (Ours)
> ⋆

Figure 3: Platform positioning along simulation fidelity and agent domain breadth. CARLA-Air ( ⋆) occupies the high-fidelity, multi-domain quadrant without inter-process bridging. Dashed arrows indicate subsumption of upstream capabilities. 

# 3 System Architecture 

CARLA-Air integrates CARLA [ 2] and AirSim [ 15 ]within a single Unreal Engine [ 3] process through a mini-mal bridging layer that resolves a fundamental engine-level initialization conflict while preserving both platforms’ na-tive APIs, physics engines, and rendering pipelines intact. Fig. 4 presents the high-level runtime structure; the follow-ing subsections elaborate each design decision. 4Table 1: Consolidated comparison of representative open-source simulation platforms for air-ground embodied intelligence research. ✓ = supported; ∼ = partial or constrained; × = not supported; — = not applicable. 

Platform Urban Traffic Pedes-trians UAV Flight Single Process Shared Renderer Native APIs Joint Sensors Prebuilt Binary Test Suite Custom Assets Open Source 

Autonomous Driving 

CARLA [2] ✓ ✓ × ✓ ✓ ✓ × ✓ × ✓ ✓

LGSVL [13] ✓ ✓ × ✓ ✓ ✓ × ✓ × ∼ ✓

SUMO [8] ✓ ✓ × ✓ × ✓ × ✓ × × ✓

MetaDrive [7] ✓ ∼ × ✓ ∼ ✓ × × × × ✓

VISTA [1] ∼ × × ✓ ∼ ✓ × × × × ✓

Aerial / UAV 

AirSim [15] × × ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ × ✓ × ✓ ✓

Flightmare [16] × × ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ × × × ∼ ✓

FlightGoggles [5] × × ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ × × × ∼ ✓

Gazebo / RotorS [6, 4] ∼ ∼ ✓ ✓ ∼ ✓ × ✓ × ✓ ✓

OmniDrones [19] × × ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ × × × ✓ ✓

gym-pybullet-drones [12] × × ✓ ✓ ∼ ✓ × × × ∼ ✓

Joint / Co-Simulation 

TranSimHub [17] ✓ ✓ ✓ × × × ∼ — × × ✓

CARLA+SUMO [2, 8] ✓ ✓ × × × ∼ × — × × ✓

AirSim+Gazebo [15, 6, 9] ∼ ∼ ✓ × × ∼ ∼ — × ∼ ✓

Embodied AI & RL 

Isaac Lab [11] × × ∼ ✓ ✓ ✓ × × ✓ ✓ ✓

Isaac Gym [10] × × ∼ ✓ ✓ ✓ × × × × ✓

Habitat [14] × ∼ × ✓ ✓ ✓ × × × × ✓

SAPIEN [18] × × × ✓ ✓ ✓ × × × ∼ ✓

RoboSuite [20] × × × ✓ ✓ ✓ × × × ∼ ✓

CARLA-Air (Ours) ✓ ✓† ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓

> †

Pedestrian AI is inherited from CARLA and fully functional; behavior under high actor density in joint scenarios is an active engineering target (Section 6). 

Python CARLA Client 

Python AirSim Client 

> Single UE4 Process

CARLA RPC Server AirSim RPC Server 

CARLA-Air Game Mode (CARLAAirGameMode )

Ground Subsystems 

> episode • weather • traffic actors • scenario recorder
> acquired via inheritance

Aerial Flight Actor  

> physics engine • flight pawn aerial sensor suite
> composed in BEGIN PLAY

Shared UE4 Rendering Pipeline RGB • depth • segmentation • weather effects 

Figure 4: Runtime architecture of CARLA-Air. A sin-gle engine process hosts both simulation backends, each communicating with its respective Python client via an in-dependent RPC server. CARLAAirGameMode acquires ground simulation functionality through class inheritance and integrates the aerial flight actor through composition. All world actors share a single rendering pipeline. Table 2: Architectural comparison of representative joint and co-simulation platforms. a

Platform Single Proc. API Kept Shared Render Sync Mode Open Source 

TranSimHub [17] × × × Msg. ✓

CARLA+SUMO [2, 8] × ∼ × RPC ✓

AirSim+Gazebo [ 15 , 6,9] × ∼ × Decpl. ✓

AirSim+CARLA b × × × Decpl. ✓

CARLA-Air (Ours) ✓ ✓ ✓ Shared ✓

> a

Single Proc. = single-process execution; API Kept = preservation of native simulator APIs; Shared Render = shared rendering pipeline; Sync Mode: Msg. = message passing, Decpl. = decoupled execution, Shared = shared-tick within one process. 

> b

Refers to community bridge solutions that run AirSim and CARLA as independent processes connected via ROS 2 or custom middleware; not an official product of either project. 

## 3.1 Plugin and Dependency Structure 

The system comprises two plugin modules that load se-quentially during engine startup. The ground simulation plugin initializes first, establishing its world management subsystems before any game logic executes. The aerial simulation plugin declares a compile-time dependency on the ground plugin, enabling CARLAAirGameMode to ac-cess the ground platform’s initialization interfaces during its own startup phase. This dependency is strictly one-directional: no ground-platform source file references any 5aerial component, preserving the upstream CARLA code-base’s update path without modification. Two independent RPC servers run concurrently within the single process— one per simulator—allowing the native Python clients of each platform to connect without modification. Version compatibility across the two upstream code-bases, network configuration, and port assignments are documented in Appendix A.1. 

## 3.2 The GameMode Conflict and Its Resolu-tion 

UE4 enforces a strict invariant: each world may have ex-actly one active game mode. CARLA’s game mode orches-trates episode management, weather control, traffic simu-lation, the actor lifecycle, and the RPC interface through a deep inheritance chain. AirSim’s game mode performs a separate startup sequence—reading configuration files, adjusting rendering settings, and spawning its flight actor. Because the two game modes are unrelated by inheritance, assigning either to the world map silently skips the other’s initialization, rendering a large portion of its API surface inoperative. 

Architectural asymmetry. A structural difference be-tween the two systems makes resolution tractable and constitutes the central design insight of CARLA-Air. CARLA’s subsystems are tightly coupled to its game mode through inheritance and privileged class relationships; they cannot be relocated outside the game mode slot without invasive upstream refactoring. AirSim’s flight logic, by contrast, resides in a class derived from the generic ac-tor base—not the game mode base—and can therefore be spawned as a regular world actor at any point after world initialization. 

Solution: single inheritance plus composition. We introduce CARLAAirGameMode , which inherits from CARLA’s game mode base and occupies the single avail-able slot. All ground simulation subsystems are thereby acquired through the standard UE4 lifecycle. The aerial flight actor is then composed into the world during the engine’s B EGIN PLAY phase, after ground initialization is complete, and never competes for the game mode slot. Fig. 5 contrasts the naive conflict with this adopted solu-tion. 

Source footprint. The integration modifies exactly two files in the upstream CARLA source tree: two previously private members are promoted to protected visibility and one privileged class declaration is added. All remaining integration code resides within the aerial plugin as purely additive content. The complete modification summary is provided in Appendix A.2. 

## 3.3 Coordinate System Mapping 

CARLA and AirSim employ incompatible spatial refer-ence frames that must be reconciled to co-register aerial and ground sensor data. CARLA inherits UE4’s left-handed system with X forward, Y right, and Z up, in centimeters. AirSim adopts a right-handed North-East-Down (NED) frame with X north, Y east, and Z down, in meters. Fig. 6 illustrates both frames and their geometric relationship. Let p ∈ R3 denote a point in the UE4 world frame and 

o the shared world origin established during initialization. The equivalent NED position is 

pNED = 1100 



px − ox

py − oy

−(pz − oz )

 , (1) where the scale factor converts centimeters to meters and the sign reversal on the third component reflects the Z-axis inversion. Because the X and Y axes are directionally aligned, no axis permutation is required. For orientation, let q = ( w, q x, q y , q z ) denote a unit quaternion in the UE4 frame. The equivalent NED quater-nion is 

qNED =  w, q x, q y , −qz

, (2) where negating qz accounts for the Z-axis reversal and the associated change of frame handedness. Eqs. (1) and (2) to-gether fully specify the pose transform, enabling consistent fusion of drone attitude from the aerial API with vehicle heading from the ground API across all joint simulation workflows. 

## 3.4 Asset Import Pipeline 

CARLA-Air provides an extensible asset import pipeline that allows researchers to bring custom robot platforms, UAV models, vehicles, and environment assets into the shared simulation world. Imported assets are fully inte-grated into the joint simulation environment: they partic-ipate in the same physics tick and rendering pass as all built-in actors, respond to both ground and aerial API calls, and are visible to all sensor modalities across both sim-ulation backends. This capability enables evaluation of custom hardware designs—such as novel multirotor con-figurations or application-specific ground robots—within realistic air-ground scenarios without modifying the core CARLA-Air codebase. Fig. 14 shows two examples of user-imported assets operating within the platform. 6(a) Naive approach 

UE4 Game Mode Slot 

CARLA Game Mode 

AirSim Game Mode 

## × × 

> Ground subsystems Aerial flight actor
> One mode silently discarded; corresponding API inoperative
> (b) CARLA-Air solution

CARLA Game Mode Base 

CARLAAirGameMode 

> occupies game mode slot
> Ground Subsystems
> inherited
> Aerial Flight Actor
> composed

Figure 5: Resolving the UE4 single-game-mode constraint. (a) Both backends provide independent game mode classes; assigning either silently discards the other. (b) CARLAAirGameMode inherits all ground functionality from CARLA’s game mode base while composing the aerial flight actor as a spawned world actor. 

Figure 6: Coordinate frames of the two simulation back-ends. The transform T requires only a Z-axis sign flip and a centimeter-to-meter scale factor; the forward ( X/XN )and rightward ( Y /YE ) axes are aligned across both conven-tions. 

# 4 Performance Evaluation 

This section evaluates CARLA-Air under representa-tive joint air-ground workloads across three experiments: frame-rate and resource scaling (Section 4.2), memory stability under sustained operation (Section 4.3), and com-munication latency (Section 4.4). Full configuration pa-rameters and raw data are deferred to Appendix A.1. 

Reference hardware. All measurements are collected on a workstation equipped with an NVIDIA RTX A4000 (16 GB GDDR6), AMD Ryzen 7 5800X (8-core, 4.7 GHz), and 32 GB DDR4-3200, running Ubuntu 20.04 LTS. The simulator runs in Epic quality mode with Town10HD loaded unless stated otherwise. All aerial experiments use the built-in SimpleFlight controller with default PID gains. CPU affinity and GPU power limits are left at system defaults to reflect realistic research deployment conditions. 

## 4.1 Benchmark Methodology 

Reliable performance measurement requires eliminating startup transients—map-loading jitter, first-frame shader compilation, and actor lifecycle initialization must be dis-carded before steady-state sampling begins. Algorithm 1 formalizes the benchmark harness used throughout this section. 

Algorithm 1 Simulation Performance Benchmark Harness                                                       

> Require: Workload W, warm-up ticks Tw, measurement ticks Tm
> Ensure: Frame-time f, VRAM v, latency ℓ
> 1: Connect to simulation; load map; wait for shader compilation 2: Spawn actors/sensors per W; enable synchronous mode 3: for t= 1 to Twdo ▷Warm-up—discarded 4: Advance one tick 5: end for
> 6: f,v,ℓ← ⟨⟩
> 7: for t= 1 to Tmdo
> 8: t0←NOW () ; advance one tick 9: f.APPEND (1 /(NOW () −t0))
> 10: if VRAM sample interval reached then
> 11: Record GPU memory →v; measure API round-trip →ℓ
> 12: end if
> 13: end for
> 14: Destroy all actors; disable synchronous mode 15: return f,v,ℓ

Each profile uses Tw = 200 warm-up ticks and Tm =2,000 measurement ticks. VRAM is sampled every 60 s. All reported frame rates are the harmonic mean of f —the appropriate central tendency for rate quantities—with standard deviations alongside. The latency benchmark is-sues 500 warm-up calls followed by 5 000 measurement calls; actor spawn calls are each paired with an immediate destroy to prevent scene-state accumulation from contami-nating subsequent measurements. 74.2 Experiment 1: Frame Rate and Re-source Scaling 

Workload design. Under synchronous-mode operation, per-tick wall time is bounded by the slowest of three con-current contributors: the rendering thread (GPU-bound), the ground-actor dispatch loop (CPU-bound), and the aerial physics engine (CPU-bound, asynchronous at ≈1,000 Hz on a dedicated thread). Sensor rendering dominates at high resolution due to GPU memory bandwidth satura-tion; actor population contributes via per-mesh draw calls. These relationships motivate the workload stratification in Table 3. 

Analysis. The moderate joint configuration—combining ground traffic, an aerial agent, and a full sensor suite— sustains 19 .8 ± 1.1 FPS, sufficient for closed-loop pol-icy evaluation at standard RL episode lengths. Compar-ing the standalone ground baseline ( 28 .4 FPS) against the moderate joint profile ( 19 .8 FPS) quantifies total integra-tion overhead at 8.6 FPS (30.3%), of which 2.1 FPS is at-tributable to ground co-hosting and the remaining 6.5 FPS to the aerial physics engine. Crucially, this aerial over-head manifests entirely in CPU utilization ( 54% vs. 38% )rather than GPU memory: VRAM differs by only 39 MiB between ground-only and moderate-joint profiles. The traffic surveillance profile retains comparable throughput (20 .1 FPS) despite doubling the vehicle count, confirming that sensor rendering—not actor population—is the dom-inant cost driver at 1920 × 1080 . The 3-hour endurance profile ( 19 .7 ± 1.3 FPS) confirms that throughput does not degrade under sustained operation. 

## 4.3 Experiment 2: Memory Stability 

Steady-state VRAM profile. The base map asset load accounts for approximately 3 702 MiB at idle (Town10HD, Epic quality); each additional ground sensor contributes 4– 10 MiB at 1280 × 720 . A transient peak of approximately 5 000 MiB occurs during map loading and resolves within 30 s. All steady-state profiles remain within 3 878 MiB, retaining approximately 12 506 MiB (76%) of the 16 GB device budget for co-located workloads such as GPU-based policy training. 

Leak verification. Table 4 summarises the 3-hour en-durance run across 357 actor spawn-and-destroy cycles. A linear regression of VRAM against cycle index yields a slope of 0.49 MiB/cycle with R2 = 0 .11 , indicating no statistically significant accumulation trend. Fig. 7 visu-alises the VRAM trace: the negligible early-to-late drift (3,868 → 3,878 MiB, approximately 10 MiB over 327 cy-cles) is attributable to residual render-target caching rather than lifecycle leakage.           

> Time (min)
> VRAM (MiB)
> 3800
> 3840
> 3880
> 3920
> 030 60 90 120 150 180
> early late
> ¯vearly = 3868
> ¯vlate = 3878
> VRAM (60 s interval) Phase mean

Figure 7: VRAM trace over a 3-hour stability run (357 spawn/destroy cycles, moderate joint configuration, RTX A4000). Early-to-late drift is ≈10 MiB; linear regres-sion yields R2 = 0 .11 , confirming no significant memory accumulation. Zero API errors and zero simulation crashes across 357 cycles validate the robustness of the joint environ-ment under the repeated agent-reset patterns typical of reinforcement-learning training. 

## 4.4 Experiment 3: Communication Latency 

Both simulation APIs operate within the same process on the loopback interface, eliminating inter-process serial-ization overhead. The two RPC servers use distinct wire protocols and port assignments (detailed in Appendix A.1). Table 5 reports round-trip latency for representative API calls. 

Analysis. Lightweight state queries complete in 280– 490 μs, well below the per-tick budget at 20 FPS (50 ms), confirming that API overhead does not contribute mean-ingfully to frame-time variance. Actor spawn latency (1 850 μs) reflects a one-time GPU synchronization point for render-asset registration at episode reset. Image cap-ture latency (3 200 μs) covers the full sensor pipeline— rendering, buffer readback, and serialization—and is over-lapped with the rendering thread at synchronous tick rates. All measured values fall below the lower bound of bridge-based cross-process synchronization costs reported in [ 17 ](1 000–5 000 μs per frame). 

Tick-rate reconciliation. The aerial physics engine ad-vances at ≈1,000 Hz on its dedicated thread, while the rendering tick runs at ≈20 Hz under the moderate joint workload. Sensor callbacks read the aerial state at render-ing tick boundaries, so each ground-aerial sensor frame pair reflects the drone’s integrated physical state over ≈50 

aerial physics steps. Ground actor states are also resolved at tick boundaries, ensuring temporal co-registration across all sensor modalities within a single tick. Applications re-quiring finer aerial state resolution should reduce the fixed 8Table 3: Frame rate and resource consumption across representative joint workloads (RTX A4000, Town10HD, Epic quality, synchronous mode). Harmonic mean ± 1 SD over 2 000 ticks after 200 warm-up.                                                                                

> Profile Configuration FPS VRAM (MiB) CPU (%)
> Standalone baselines
> Ground sim only s3 vehicles + 2 pedestrians; 8 sensors @ 1280 ×720 28 .4±1.23,821 ±10 31 ±3
> Aerial sim only s1 drone; 8 sensors @ 1280 ×720 44 .7±2.12,941 ±829 ±3
> Joint workloads
> Idle Town10HD; no actors; no sensors 60 .0±0.43,702 ±812 ±2
> Ground only 3 vehicles + 2 pedestrians; 8 sensors @ 1280 ×720 26 .3±1.43,831 ±11 38 ±4
> Moderate joint 3 vehicles + 2 pedestrians + 1 drone; 8 sensors @ 1280 ×720 19 .8±1.13,870 ±13 54 ±5
> Traffic surveillance 8 autopilot vehicles + 1 drone; 1 aerial RGB @ 1920 ×1080 20 .1±1.83,874 ±15 61 ±6
> Stability endurance Moderate joint; 357 spawn/destroy cycles; 3 hr continuous 19 .7±1.33,878 ±17 55 ±5
> sStandalone baseline: single simulator running without CARLA-Air integration.

Table 4: Stability endurance results over 3 hours and 357 actor lifecycle cycles (moderate joint configuration). 

Metric Early (cycles 1–30) Late (cycles 328–357) 

Frame rate (FPS) 19 .9 ± 1.2 19 .7 ± 1.3

VRAM (MiB) 3,868 ± 14 3,878 ± 17 

CPU utilization (%) 53 ± 5 55 ± 5

API error count 0 0Crash count 0 0VRAM regression slope 0.49 MiB/cycle, R2 = 0 .11 

simulation delta-time accordingly; the throughput trade-off follows from Table 3. 

# 5 Representative Applications 

CARLA-Air is validated through five representative work-flows that collectively exercise the platform’s core capa-bilities across the four research directions identified in Section 1: air-ground cooperation, embodied navigation and vision-language action, multi-modal perception and dataset construction, and reinforcement-learning-based policy training. Table 6 provides a structured overview; detailed descriptions follow in Sections 5.1–5.5. All workflows share a common dual-client architecture: both API clients execute within the same Python process and operate on the same world state without inter-process communication. The following minimal pattern is common to every workflow:            

> ground =carla.Client(’localhost’, 2000) aerial =airsim.MultirotorClient() world =ground.get_world() #shared aerial.enableApiControl(True)
> User Python Script
> Ground Client Aerial Client
> Ground RPC Aerial RPC
> Unified UE4 Process
> Ground
> Game Mode
> Aerial
> Sim Mode
> Shared World — Actors, Physics, Rendering, Weather

Figure 8: Dual-client architecture shared by all five work-flows. A single Python script drives both clients, connected via TCP to independent RPC servers inside the unified en-gine process. 

## 5.1 W1: Air-Ground Cooperative Precision Landing 

Autonomous precision landing of a UAV on a moving ground vehicle is a representative and challenging sce-nario for air-ground cooperation, with direct applications in drone-assisted logistics, mobile recharging, and multi-agent coordination. This workflow demonstrates real-time cross-domain coordination within CARLA-Air’s tick-synchronous control loop: the drone must continuously track the vehicle’s position, plan a descent trajectory, and execute a smooth touchdown—all while the vehicle is in motion through urban traffic. 

Setup. A ground vehicle follows an autopilot route through Town10HD at moderate speed. A drone starts at ≈12 m altitude above the vehicle and is tasked with landing on the vehicle’s roof. At each synchronous tick, the vehicle’s 3D pose is queried via the ground API, trans-formed into the aerial NED frame using the coordinate 9Table 5: Round-trip API call latency on the loopback interface (median ± IQR; 5 000 calls after 500 warm-up; RTX A4000; idle scene). 

API Call Median ( μs) IQR ( μs) 

Ground sim World state snapshot 320 40 Ground sim Actor transform query 280 35 Ground sim Actor spawn (+ paired destroy) 1,850 210 Ground sim Actor destroy 920 95 Aerial sim Multirotor state query 410 55 Aerial sim Image capture (1 RGB stream) 3,200 380 Aerial sim Velocity command dispatch 490 60 Bridge IPC [17] Cross-process state sync (ref.) 3,000 2,000 

Table 6: Summary of five representative workflows validated on CARLA-Air, mapped to the four research directions from Section 1.                                  

> Workflow Research Direction Platform Features Exer-cised FPS Key Outcome
> W1 Precision landing Air-ground cooperation Tick-sync control, de-scent planning, cross-frame coordination
> ≈19 <0.5m final landing error W2 VLN/VLA data generation Embodied navigation Dual-view sensing, way-point planning, semantic annotation —Cross-view VLN data pipeline W3 Multi-modal dataset Perception & dataset 12-stream sync capture, shared tick
> ≈17 ≤1-tick alignment error W4 Cross-view perception Perception & dataset Shared renderer, weather consistency
> ≈18 14/14 weather presets veri-fied W5 RL training env. RL policy training Sync stepping, stable re-sets, cross-domain re-ward —357 reset cycles, 0 crashes

mapping from Section 3.3, and used to compute a descent command issued to the aerial flight controller. 

Control architecture. The landing controller operates in three phases: approach (horizontal alignment with the vehicle), descent (controlled altitude reduction while main-taining horizontal tracking), and touchdown (final landing). Let qk ∈ R2 denote the vehicle’s horizontal position at tick 

k in the NED frame. The drone’s commanded horizontal target tracks the vehicle continuously: 

ˆqk = qk + d, ˆzk = zref  

> k

, (3) where d is the coordinate origin offset from Eq. (4) and 

zref  

> k

decreases according to a smooth descent profile from the initial altitude to ground level. 

Results. Fig. 9 shows the complete landing sequence. The drone descends from ≈12 m to touchdown over ≈20 s, with horizontal convergence error decreasing from ≈6 mto within the ±0.5 m tolerance band. The 3D trajec-tory overview confirms that the UAV trajectory converges smoothly onto the vehicle trajectory throughout the de-scent. Table 7 summarizes the landing performance. Table 7: W1 cooperative precision landing results (Town10HD, RTX A4000). 

Metric Value Notes 

Mean FPS 19 .3 Harmonic mean Initial altitude ≈12 m Start of descent Landing duration ≈20 s Approach to touchdown Final horiz. error < 0.5 m Within tolerance band Initial horiz. error ≈6 m At descent start RPC errors 0 Both clients 

## 5.2 W2: Embodied Navigation and VLN/VLA Data Generation 

Vision-language navigation (VLN) and vision-language ac-tion (VLA) are among the most active research directions in embodied intelligence, requiring agents to navigate and act in realistic environments grounded in natural language instructions and visual observations. A key bottleneck is the availability of large-scale, diverse training data that pairs language instructions with rich visual observations from multiple viewpoints. CARLA-Air provides a natural 10 Figure 9: W1: Air-ground cooperative precision landing on a moving vehicle. (a) Time-lapse sequence ( t1–t5) showing the drone (red box) descending toward and landing on a moving ground vehicle through approach, descent, and touchdown phases. (b) 3D trajectory overview: the UAV trajectory (blue) converges onto the vehicle trajectory (orange), with the ground projection (dashed) showing horizontal alignment. (c) Altitude profile over time, illustrating smooth descent from 12 m to ground level. (d) Horizontal convergence error, decreasing from ≈6 m to within the ±0.5 mtolerance band. All data are recorded within CARLA-Air’s synchronous tick loop. data generation infrastructure for this purpose: its photo-realistic urban environments, socially-aware pedestrians, dynamic traffic, and simultaneous aerial-ground sensing enable the construction of VLN/VLA datasets with cross-view visual grounding that single-domain platforms cannot provide. 

Platform capabilities for VLN/VLA. CARLA-Air sup-ports VLN/VLA data generation through several platform-level features: (i) both aerial and ground agents can be equipped with egocentric RGB, depth, and semantic seg-mentation cameras, providing paired bird’s-eye and street-level visual observations along any navigation trajectory; (ii) the ground API exposes waypoint-based route plan-ning with lane-level precision, which can serve as the basis for generating language-grounded navigation instructions; (iii) the shared rendering pipeline guarantees that all vi-sual observations are captured under identical weather, lighting, and scene conditions at each tick; and (iv) the aerial overview provides a natural “oracle view” for gener-ating spatial referring expressions and verifying navigation progress. 

## 5.3 W3: Synchronized Multi-Modal Dataset Collection 

Generating large-scale paired aerial-ground datasets is a bottleneck for training and evaluating cooperative percep-tion models. Manual synchronization across separate sim-ulator processes introduces alignment errors that corrupt correspondence annotations. CARLA-Air eliminates this bottleneck: because both sensor suites are driven by the same tick counter, the resulting dataset records carry guar-anteed per-tick correspondence with zero interpolation overhead. 

Setup. Eight ground sensors (RGB, semantic segmen-tation, depth, LiDAR, radar, GNSS, IMU, collision) and four aerial sensors (RGB, depth, IMU, GPS) are attached concurrently. The simulation runs in synchronous mode at a fixed timestep; all 12 sensor callbacks are registered before the first tick advance. Ground traffic is populated with 30 autopilot vehicles and 10 pedestrians. 

Dataset structure. Each record Rk at tick k contains all 12 sensor observations sharing a common tick index, plus vehicle and drone pose in the unified world frame. Records are serialized to disk in a flat per-tick directory structure with metadata in JSON. No timestamp interpolation is 11 Figure 10: W2: Embodied navigation with aerial reasoning. A UAV autonomously tracks a pedestrian (red box, bottom) through an urban environment using bird’s-eye visual observations. Each frame is annotated with the drone’s chain-of-thought reasoning, illustrating how the agent interprets the scene, anticipates occlusions, and adjusts its flight path to maintain persistent visual contact with the target. All frames are rendered within CARLA-Air’s shared simulation world under consistent lighting and physics. required: the shared tick index serves as the alignment key. 

Results. Over 1 000 ticks, the workflow produces 1 000 fully synchronized 12-stream records at a mean collection rate of ≈17 Hz. The maximum observed tick-alignment deviation across all 12 streams is one tick (occurring tran-siently under disk-write saturation). Table 8 summarizes collection performance. Table 8: W3 multi-modal dataset collection results (1 000 ticks, 30 vehicles, 10 pedestrians, Town10HD, RTX A4000).                   

> Metric Value Notes
> Mean FPS 17 .1Harmonic mean Concurrent streams 12 8 ground + 4 aerial Records collected 1 000 One per tick Max alignment dev. ≤1tick Normal disk-write load RPC errors 0Both clients Per-tick write latency 61 ±9ms Incl. serialization

## 5.4 W4: Air-Ground Cross-View Perception 

Cross-view perception—fusing aerial bird’s-eye observa-tions with ground-level sensing—is an emerging research direction for cooperative autonomous driving, urban scene understanding, and 3D reconstruction. This workflow demonstrates CARLA-Air’s ability to provide spatially and temporally co-registered multi-modal sensor streams from both aerial and ground viewpoints within a single shared environment. 

Setup. A drone equipped with a depth camera hovers above a road segment while a ground ego vehicle equipped with a semantic segmentation camera traverses the same segment. Both sensors are queried at each synchronous tick. 

Sensor co-registration. Co-registration leverages the coordinate mapping from Section 3.3. The origin offset 

d ∈ R3 between the aerial NED frame and the ground world frame is computed once at initialization: 

d = T  pworld spawn 

 − pNED spawn , (4) where T (·) applies the scale conversion and axis remap-ping. When the drone spawns at the world origin, d = 0.

Weather consistency. To verify rendering consistency across both sensor layers, the workflow iterates through all 14 official weather presets. For each preset involving significant illumination change, the mean pixel intensity of the aerial RGB frame shifts by more than 5% relative to the previous preset, confirming single-pass weather prop-agation. Because both sensors share the same rendering pipeline, temporal alignment is guaranteed: 

ϵk = tgnd  

> k

− tair  

> k

= 0 , (5) a property that bridge-based architectures cannot provide. 

Results. Over 500 ticks, the workflow produces 500 co-registered aerial-depth / ground-segmentation pairs at 

≈18 Hz with zero RPC errors. All 14 weather presets pass the illumination consistency assertion. Table 9 summarizes the measured outcomes. Table 9: W4 cross-view perception results (500 ticks, Town10HD, RTX A4000).                   

> Metric Value Notes
> Mean FPS 18 .2Harmonic mean Co-registered pairs 500 Aerial depth + ground seg. Per-tick latency 52 ±6ms Full collection loop Sensor alignment 0ticks Sync mode guarantee Weather presets passed 14 /14 All official presets RPC errors 0Both clients

12 Figure 11: W3: Synchronized multi-modal dataset collection at a single simulation tick. Top row (vehicle perspective): RGB, semantic segmentation, depth, LiDAR bird’s-eye view, surface normals, and instance segmentation. Bottom row 

(drone perspective): the same six modalities captured simultaneously from the aerial viewpoint. All 12 sensor streams share an identical tick index and are rendered under the same lighting and weather conditions through CARLA-Air’s shared rendering pipeline, guaranteeing per-tick spatial-temporal correspondence without interpolation. 

Figure 12: W4: Air-ground cross-view perception across diverse environments and weather conditions. Each row shows an aerial RGB view from the drone across six representative CARLA maps (Town 01–05 and Town 10HD); each column corresponds to a different weather preset (Clear Noon, Cloudy Noon, Dense Fog, Hard Rain, Night, Soft Rain, and Sunset). 

## 5.5 W5: Reinforcement Learning Training Environment 

Reinforcement learning in air-ground cooperative settings requires a simulation environment that provides closed-loop interaction, consistent state observations across het-erogeneous agents, and stable long-horizon episode ex-ecution without memory leaks or synchronization drift. CARLA-Air’s single-process architecture naturally sat-isfies these requirements, and the stability results from Section 4.3 (zero crashes and zero memory accumulation over 357 reset cycles) directly validate its suitability as an RL training environment. 

Platform capabilities for RL. CARLA-Air supports RL training workflows through several platform-level features: (i) synchronous stepping mode provides deterministic state transitions compatible with standard Gym-style training loops; (ii) both aerial and ground agents expose program-matic control interfaces (velocity commands, waypoint targets, autopilot toggles) that can serve as action spaces; (iii) the full sensor suite (RGB, depth, segmentation, Li-DAR, IMU, GPS) provides rich observation spaces for both state-based and vision-based policies; (iv) episode resets via actor spawn/destroy are validated for stability across hundreds of consecutive cycles (Section 4.3); and (v) the shared world state ensures that reward signals com-puted from cross-domain interactions (e.g., aerial-ground relative positioning) are physically consistent. 13 Example: cooperative positioning. As a representative RL scenario, consider a drone learning to maintain an optimal aerial observation position relative to a moving ground vehicle under varying traffic conditions. The ob-servation space comprises the drone’s pose, the vehicle’s pose, and surrounding traffic state; the action space is a 3D velocity command; the reward encodes lateral tracking error and altitude maintenance. This scenario exercises the full air-ground control loop within CARLA-Air’s syn-chronous tick, and can be implemented using standard RL libraries (e.g., Stable-Baselines3, RLlib) with minimal wrapper code. 

# 6 Limitations and Future Work 

The current release of CARLA-Air is validated for the workflows presented in Section 5: single- and dual-drone aerial operations over moderate-density urban traffic scenes. • Actor density. Joint simulation performance is char-acterized at moderate traffic loads; high-density scenes with large simultaneous actor populations remain an ac-tive engineering target. • Environment resets. Map switching requires a full process restart due to independent actor lifecycle man-agement in each simulator backend; staged in-session resets are planned for a future release. • Multi-drone scale. Configurations beyond two drones are functional but not yet formally validated across a wide range of scenarios; expanded multi-drone charac-terization will be documented once inter-agent behavior has been fully profiled. None of these constraints affect the workflows in Section 5, all of which operate within the current boundaries. Because CARLA-Air inherits and extends AirSim’s aerial capabilities—whose upstream development has been archived—long-term maintenance of the aerial stack is managed within the CARLA-Air project itself. Bug fixes, compatibility updates, and feature extensions to the aerial subsystem are released as part of CARLA-Air’s regular up-date cycle, ensuring that the flight simulation capabilities continue to evolve independently of the original upstream repository. Looking ahead, near-term work will address physics-state synchronization between the two engines and a ROS 2 [ 9] bridge that republishes both simulator streams as standard topics for broader ecosystem integration. Longer-term, we aim to support GPU-parallel multi-environment execution in the spirit of Isaac Lab [ 11 ]and OmniDrones [ 19 ], bringing CARLA-Air closer to the episode throughput required for large-scale reinforcement learning. 

# 7 Conclusion 

Simulation platforms for autonomous systems have his-torically fragmented along domain boundaries, forcing researchers whose work spans ground and aerial domains to maintain inter-process bridge infrastructure or accept capability compromises. CARLA-Air resolves this frag-mentation by integrating CARLA [ 2 ] and AirSim [ 15 ]within a single Unreal Engine process [ 3 ], exposing both native Python APIs concurrently over a shared physics tick and rendering pipeline. 

Technical contributions. The central technical con-tribution is a principled resolution of the single-GameMode constraint through a composition-based de-sign: CARLAAirGameMode inherits CARLA’s ground simulation subsystems while composing AirSim’s aerial flight actor as a standard world entity, with modifications to exactly two upstream source files. This design yields three properties unavailable in bridge-based approaches: a shared physics tick that eliminates inter-process clock drift, a shared rendering pipeline that guarantees consistent weather and lighting across all sensor viewpoints, and full preservation of both upstream Python APIs. 

Platform capabilities. Building on this architecture, CARLA-Air provides a photorealistic, physically coher-ent simulation world with rule-compliant traffic, socially-aware pedestrians, and aerodynamically consistent multi-rotor dynamics. Up to 18 sensor modalities can be syn-chronously captured across aerial and ground platforms at each simulation tick. The platform directly supports four research directions in air-ground embodied intelligence: air-ground cooperation, embodied navigation and vision-language action, multi-modal perception and dataset con-struction, and reinforcement-learning-based policy train-ing. 

Validation. The platform is validated through perfor-mance benchmarks demonstrating stable operation at 

≈20 FPS under joint workloads, a 3-hour continuous sta-bility run with zero crashes across 357 reset cycles, and five representative workflows that exercise the platform’s core capabilities. A consolidated feature comparison with representative platforms is provided in Table 1 (Section 2). 

Broader impact. By providing a shared world state for aerial and ground agents, CARLA-Air enables research di-rections that are structurally inaccessible in single-domain 14 Figure 13: W5: Reinforcement learning training environment. Top: a drone learns to maintain an optimal aerial observation position above a moving ground vehicle within CARLA-Air’s urban traffic environment. Bottom: the closed-loop RL pipeline. At each synchronous tick, CARLA-Air provides an observation space (drone and vehicle poses, relative distance, surrounding traffic state) to the policy network, which outputs 3D velocity commands as actions. The reward signal encodes tracking accuracy, altitude maintenance, and collision avoidance. platforms: paired aerial-ground perception datasets from physically consistent viewpoints, coordination policies over joint multi-modal observation spaces, and embod-ied navigation grounded in cross-view visual and linguistic input. By also inheriting and extending the aerial simula-tion capabilities of AirSim—whose upstream development has been archived—CARLA-Air ensures that this widely adopted flight stack continues to evolve within a modern, actively maintained infrastructure. 

# References 

[1] Alexander Amini, Tsun-Hsuan Wang, Igor Gilitschenski, Wilko Schwarting, Zhijian Liu, Song Han, Sertac Karaman, and Daniela Rus. VISTA 2.0: An open, data-driven simulator for multimodal sensing and policy learning for autonomous vehicles. In IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , pages 4349–4356, 2022. [2] Alexey Dosovitskiy, German Ros, Felipe Codevilla, Antonio Lopez, and Vladlen Koltun. CARLA: An open urban driving simulator. In Proceedings of the Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL) , pages 1–16, 2017. [3] Epic Games. Unreal Engine 4 documenta-tion. https://docs.unrealengine.com/4. 26/ , 2021. [4] Fadri Furrer, Michael Burri, Markus Achtelik, and Roland Siegwart. RotorS—a modular gazebo MAV simulator framework. In Robot Operating System (ROS): The Complete Reference , volume 1, pages 595–625. Springer, 2016. [5] Winter Guerra, Ezra Tal, Varun Murali, Gilhyun Ryou, and Sertac Karaman. FlightGoggles: Pho-torealistic sensor simulation for perception-driven robotics using photogrammetry and virtual reality. In IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) , pages 6941–6948, 2019. [6] Nathan Koenig and Andrew Howard. Design and use paradigms for Gazebo, an open-source multi-robot simulator. In IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) , pages 2149– 2154, 2004. [7] Quanyi Li, Zhenghao Peng, Lan Feng, et al. MetaDrive: Composing diverse driving scenarios for generalizable reinforcement learning. IEEE Transac-tions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence ,45(3):3461–3475, 2023. 15 [8] Pablo Alvarez Lopez, Michael Behrisch, Laura Bieker-Walz, et al. Microscopic traffic simulation using SUMO. In IEEE International Conference on Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITSC) , pages 2575–2582, 2018. [9] Steve Macenski, Tully Foote, Brian Gerkey, Chris Lalancette, and William Woodall. Robot operating system 2: Design, architecture, and uses in the wild. 

Science Robotics , 7(66):eabm6074, 2022. [10] Viktor Makoviychuk, Lukasz Wawrzyniak, Yunrong Guo, et al. Isaac Gym: High performance GPU-based physics simulation for robot learning. In NeurIPS Datasets and Benchmarks Track , 2021. [11] NVIDIA. NVIDIA Isaac Lab: A unified and mod-ular framework for robot learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.04831 , 2025. [12] Jacopo Panerati, Hehui Zheng, SiQi Zhou, Amanda Prorok, and Angela P. Schoellig. Learning to fly—a gym environment with PyBullet physics for reinforce-ment learning of multi-agent quadcopter control. In 

IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) , pages 7512–7519, 2021. [13] Guodong Rong, Byung Hyun Shin, Hadi Tabatabaee, et al. LGSVL Simulator: A high fidelity simulator for autonomous driving. In IEEE International Con-ference on Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITSC) ,pages 1–6, 2020. [14] Manolis Savva, Abhishek Kadian, Oleksandr Maksymets, et al. Habitat: A platform for embodied AI research. In IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , pages 9339–9347, 2019. [15] Shital Shah, Debadeepta Dey, Chris Lovett, and Ashish Kapoor. AirSim: High-fidelity visual and physical simulation for autonomous vehicles. In 

Field and Service Robotics , pages 621–635. Springer, 2018. [16] Yunlong Song, Selim Naji, Elia Kaufmann, Antonio Loquercio, and Davide Scaramuzza. Flightmare: A flexible quadrotor simulator. In Proceedings of the Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL) , pages 1–16, 2021. [17] Maonan Wang, Yirong Chen, Yuxin Cai, Aoyu Pang, Yuejiao Xie, Zian Ma, Chengcheng Xu, Kemou Jiang, Ding Wang, Laurent Roullet, Chung Shue Chen, Zhiyong Cui, Yuheng Kan, Michael Lepech, and Man-On Pun. TranSimHub: A unified air-ground simulation platform for multi-modal perception and decision-making. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.15365 ,2025. [18] Fanbo Xiang, Yuzhe Qin, Kaichun Mo, et al. SAPIEN: A simAted part-based interactive ENvi-ronment. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pages 11097– 11107, 2020. [19] Botian Xu, Feng Gao, et al. OmniDrones: An effi-cient and flexible platform for reinforcement learning in drone control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.12825 ,2023. [20] Yuke Zhu, Josiah Wong, Ajay Mandlekar, Roberto Martín-Martín, et al. robosuite: A modular simula-tion framework and benchmark for robot learning. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.12293 , 2020. 

# A Appendix 

## A.1 System Configuration 

Figure 14: Custom assets imported into CARLA-Air through the extensible asset pipeline. Top: a four-wheeled mobile robot with onboard LiDAR, imported from an ex-ternal FBX model. Bottom: a custom electric sport car with user-defined vehicle dynamics. Both assets operate within the shared simulation world alongside all built-in CARLA traffic and AirSim aerial agents, and are visible to all sensor modalities. 

Reference hardware. All experiments in this report were conducted on the following configuration: Ubuntu 20.04/22.04 LTS, NVIDIA RTX A4000 (16 GB GDDR6), AMD Ryzen 7 5800X (8-core, 4.7 GHz), 32 GB DDR4-3200. 16 Software stack. CARLA 0.9.16, AirSim 1.8.1 (final sta-ble open-source release), Unreal Engine 4.26, Python 3.8+. 

Network configuration. Table 10 lists the default port assignments. Both RPC servers bind to localhost by default; remote connections require explicit IP configura-tion. Table 10: Default network port assignments.         

> Service Protocol Port
> CARLA RPC Server TCP 2000 CARLA Streaming UDP 2001 AirSim RPC Server TCP 41451

Distribution. The prebuilt binary package is approx-imately 19 GB and includes a one-command launcher (CarlaAir.sh ). The source distribution is approxi-mately 651 MB and is released under the MIT license. 

A.1.1 API Compatibility Summary 

Table 11 summarizes the API compatibility status and test coverage of the current CARLA-Air release. All 89 automated CARLA API tests pass without modification; the full AirSim flight control and sensor access API has been verified through manual and scripted testing. A total of 63 ROS 2 topics are published across both simulation backends. Table 11: API compatibility and test coverage.         

> Component Status
> CARLA API 89/89 automated tests passing AirSim API Full flight control and sensor access verified ROS 2 topics 63 total (43 CARLA + 14 AirSim + 6 generic)
> Key upstream scripts confirmed working
> manual_control.py CARLA manual driving interface
> automatic_control.py CARLA autopilot demonstration
> dynamic_weather.py CARLA weather preset cycling
> hello_drone.py AirSim basic flight demonstration

## A.2 Upstream Source Modifications 

CARLA-Air is designed to minimize modifications to the upstream CARLA codebase. The integration touches only two header files and one source file, totaling approximately 35 lines of changes. All other integration code is purely additive, residing within the aerial simulation plugin as the CARLAAirGameMode class ( ∼1,405 lines of C++). Table 12 provides the complete modification summary. Table 12: Upstream CARLA source modifications.           

> File Modification
> CarlaGameModeBase.h friend declaration for
> CARLAAirGameMode CarlaEpisode.h Sensor tagging visibility: private
> →protected CarlaGameModeBase.cpp State flag assignment (1 line)
> New integration layer (no upstream modification)
> CARLAAirGameMode Unified game mode class; ∼1,405
> lines C++

## A.3 Custom Asset Import 

CARLA-Air supports importing custom 3D assets (robot platforms, vehicles, UAV models, and environment ob-jects) through an asset pipeline built on Unreal En-gine’s content framework. Imported assets are reg-istered as spawnable actor classes and become ac-cessible through the standard CARLA Python API (world.spawn_actor() ). Once registered, custom assets share the same physics tick, rendering pass, and sen-sor visibility as all built-in actors, ensuring full consistency within the joint simulation environment. 17