Title: Learning to Play Blackjack: A Curriculum Learning Perspective

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.00076v1

Published Time: Thu, 02 Apr 2026 00:05:17 GMT

Number of Pages: 16

Markdown Content:
# Learning to Play Blackjack: A Curriculum Learning Perspective 

# Amirreza Alasti 

Leibniz University Hannover Hannover, Germany amirreza.alasti@stud.uni-hannover.de 

# Efe Erdal 

Leibniz University Hannover Hannover, Germany efe.erdal@stud.uni-hannover.de 

# Yücel Celik 

Leibniz University Hannover Hannover, Germany yucel.celik@stud.uni-hannover.de 

# Theresa Eimer 

Leibniz AI Academy Hannover, Germany t.eimer@ai.uni-hannover.de 

## Abstract 

Reinforcement Learning (RL) agents often struggle with efficiency and performance in complex environments. We propose a novel framework that uses a Large Language Model (LLM) to dynamically generate a curriculum over available actions, enabling the agent to incorporate each action individually. We apply this framework to the game of Blackjack, where the LLM creates a multi-stage training path that progressively introduces complex actions to a Tabular Q-Learning and a Deep Q-Network (DQN) agent. Our evaluation in a realistic 8-deck simulation over 10 independent runs demonstrates significant performance gains over standard training methods. The curriculum-based approach increases the DQN agent’s average win rate from 43.97% to 47.41%, reduces the average bust rate from 32.9% to 28.0%, and accelerates the overall workflow by over 74%, with the agent’s full training completing faster than the baseline’s evaluation phase alone. These results validate that LLM-guided curricula can build more effective, robust, and efficient RL agents. 

## CCS Concepts 

• Computing methodologies → Reinforcement learning ; Learn-ing task structuring .

## Keywords 

Reinforcement Learning, Curriculum Learning, Blackjack, Deep Q-Networks, Q-Learning, Large Language Models 

ACM Reference Format: 

Amirreza Alasti, Efe Erdal, Yücel Celik, and Theresa Eimer. 2025. Learning to Play Blackjack: A Curriculum Learning Perspective. In Proceedings of The Seventh International Conference on Distributed Artificial Intelligence (DAI’25), Nov 21 - Nov 24, 2025, London, United Kingdom. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 16 pages. https://doi.org/XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX  

> Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
> DAI ’25, London, United Kingdom
> ©2025 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM. ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-XXXX-X/25/11 https://doi.org/XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX

## 1 Introduction 

Reinforcement Learning (RL) is a rapidly evolving field with appli-cations ranging from robotics [ 16 , 32 ] to game playing [ 17 , 23 , 37 ]and, more recently, large language models (LLMs) [ 5, 26 ]. As RL methods are increasingly applied in complex and uncertain environ-ments [ 3, 12 , 21 ], it becomes crucial to understand their limitations and to identify strategies for improving learning efficiency and gen-eralization. The efficacy of RL is often hindered by two fundamental challenges: vast state-action spaces that make thorough exploration intractable (a phenomenon known as the "curse of dimensional-ity" [ 7, 19 ]), and sparse rewards that provide insufficient feedback to guide the learning process [ 1 ]. These issues can lead to unstable policies and inefficient learning, motivating the need for structured training strategies. To address these challenges, Curriculum Learning has been pro-posed as a strategy to guide the agent through a structured sequence of tasks, starting from simpler ones and gradually increasing in difficulty [ 4, 24 ]. By doing so, the agent can incrementally build the necessary representations and policies required to handle the full environment more effectively. Building such curricula, however, is often non-trivial. Many cur-riculum learning approaches rely on hand-crafting task sequences or at least manually defining simple start and difficult goal tasks [ 15 ]. Where these are unknown, unsupervised methods can use agent performance as a rough guide [ 10 , 27 , 28 ]. With the increasing availability of LLMs, however, they have been proposed as an acces-sible replacement for outside expertise[ 18 , 20 , 38 ]. Our approach progressively increases task complexity based on learning progress via an LLM-generated curriculum across available actions. This allows the agent to incorporate one action at a time into its policy according to the LLM’s understanding of the task. Blackjack serves as an excellent domain for this study, not only due to its partially observable state but also because it has a well-defined performance benchmark. For human players, adhering to an optimal "basic strategy" is critical. Under typical casino rules, a player using perfect basic strategy can reduce the house edge to as low as 0.5% [ 11 , 36 ]. This translates to the player winning approximately 42.4% of hands, excluding ties [ 31 ]. In contrast, a casual player who deviates from this strategy often faces a much larger house edge of 2% or more. Therefore, a key measure of our RL agent’s success is not just its ability to learn, but its capacity to converge on a policy that meets or exceeds this expert human-level performance, effectively neutralizing the inherent house advantage.  

> arXiv:2604.00076v1 [cs.LG] 31 Mar 2026 DAI ’25, Nov 21 - 24, 2025, London, United Kingdom Alasti, et al.

With this motivation in mind, our research is guided by the following questions: Can Curriculum Learning influence the per-formance of RL agents in a task like Blackjack? And how does increasing environmental complexity, such as simulating more re-alistic scenarios through larger deck sizes, affect their learning behavior? To explore these questions, we investigate the perfor-mance and limitations of two widely used RL algorithms: Tabular Q-learning [ 40 ] and Deep Q-Networks (DQN) [ 22 ] within the Black-jack environment. We conduct experiments both with and without Curriculum Learning based on Google Gemini 2.0 Flash to analyze how LLM-guided curricula impact convergence, generalization, and policy quality as task difficulty increases. Our code, including full results, can be found at https://github.com/LUH-AI-devnerds/llm-guided-curriculum-rl. 

Contributions. This paper makes the following contributions: 

• LLM-guided action curriculum: an LLM-guided staged in-troduction of actions with adaptive success thresholds driven by compact performance summaries. 

• Empirical study in the Blackjack environment: a thor-ough evaluation of our action curriculum for DQN and Tab-ular agents on Blackjack, showing an up to 3.4% increase in win rate, 4.9% decrease in bust rate, while accelerating training by 74% 

• Strategy analysis: an in-depth qualitative analysis of agent strategies and how they relate to curriculum stages. 

## 2 Related Work 

Our research is situated at the intersection of three areas we in-troduce in this Section: Reinforcement Learning applications in Blackjack, Curriculum Learning methodologies, and the emerging use of Large Language Models to guide RL agents [6, 9, 30]. 

Reinforcement Learning in Blackjack. Blackjack has long been a standard testbed for RL algorithms due to its well-defined rules and non-trivial strategic depth [ 36 ]. Similar research has suc-cessfully applied a range of techniques, including Monte Carlo methods [ 13 ], Temporal-Difference (TD) learning [ 35 ], and tab-ular Q-learning [ 39 ], to find effective playing strategies [ 8, 33 ]. These studies typically frame the game as a finite Markov Deci-sion Process (MDP) [ 29 ] and demonstrate that model-free agents can converge to policies that approximate optimal basic strategy. Other work focuses on comprehensive simulations to benchmark various approaches, from hand-crafted basic strategy charts and card-counting systems to different ML-based models, comparing them on metrics like win rate and return on investment [2]. However, a common thread in these foundational works is the immediate exposure of the agent to the entire action space from the beginning of training. This approach, while direct, presents a sig-nificant exploration challenge. The action space includes not only frequent decisions (Hit, Stand) but also rare, context-dependent, and powerful actions (Split, Double Down) [ 34 ]. Exposing all ac-tions at once increases the branching factor and can make it difficult for the agent to assign credit correctly, potentially slowing conver-gence or leading to suboptimal policies that underutilize crucial tactical moves. Our work addresses this gap through a structured introduction of actions. 

Curriculum Learning for Reinforcement Learning. Curricu-lum Learning (CL) proposes reframing a complex learning problem into a sequence of progressively harder sub-tasks [ 4 ]. The core benefit of a curriculum is that it guides the agent’s exploration, allowing it to build foundational knowledge on simpler tasks before tackling the full complexity of the environment. This often leads to improved sample efficiency, better generalization, and more stable convergence, especially in environments with sparse rewards or high-dimensional state-action spaces. In RL, this principle has been applied in various forms [ 24 ], such as starting with a simplified state space [ 41 ], gradually increasing the difficulty of goals [ 15 , 28 ], shap-ing rewards over time [ 14 ], or introducing adversaries of increasing skill in self-play scenarios [ 25 ]. For Blackjack, an action-based cur-riculum is a natural fit, mimicking how human players learn: master hitting and standing before tackling the nuances of doubling down and splitting pairs. 

LLMs as Curriculum Generators. More recently, Large Lan-guage Models (LLMs) have emerged as powerful tools for automat-ing the design of learning curricula. This paradigm shifts the burden of manual curriculum engineering to the reasoning capabilities of an LLM. Groundbreaking work like Voyager [ 38 ] uses GPT-4 as an unbounded task generator for open-ended exploration in Minecraft, creating a self-driven curriculum that continuously expands an agent’s skills. Similarly, Eureka [ 20 ] and Eurekaverse [ 18 ] leverage LLMs to co-evolve agents and their training environments to master complex robotic motor skills. Our work explores a different paradigm from these open-ended systems. We use the LLM as a domain-specific pedagogical expert 

for a well-defined task. Instead of inventing new goals, the LLM is prompted to structure the learning process based on a high-level understanding of action complexity in Blackjack. By providing it with compact performance summaries from our agent, we prompt the LLM to act as an automated ’coach,’ deciding when the agent is ready for the next level of strategic complexity. To our knowledge, this is the first systematic application of an LLM-guided action curriculum to the domain of Blackjack. It directly addresses the exploration challenges inherent in classic RL approaches to the game by bridging them with the reasoning capabilities of modern LLMs. The following sections will demonstrate that this structured methodology not only produces a final policy of superior quality and efficiency but also yields key insights into the learning process itself, such as identifying an optimal depth for the curriculum. 

## 3 Methodology 

Our LLM-guided curriculum learning framework systematically structures the agent’s learning process to improve training effi-ciency and final policy quality. The core principle is to decompose the complex task of learning Blackjack by creating a curriculum over the available actions. Instead of confronting the agent with the entire action space from the start, the LLM generates a sequence of stages with progressively increasing complexity. In each stage, the agent is restricted to a specific subset of actions, allowing it to master simpler strategies (e.g., Hit/Stand) before moving on to more nuanced ones (e.g., Double Down, Split). The LLM is responsible for defining these action subsets and setting an adaptive performance threshold, a target win rate that the agent Learning to Play Blackjack: A Curriculum Learning Perspective DAI ’25, Nov 21 - 24, 2025, London, United Kingdom 

must achieve to advance to the next stage. Figure 1 illustrates the workflow from LLM guidance through curriculum stages to our multi-agent training setup. 

## 3.1 LLM-Guided Curriculum Design 

The curriculum generation utilizes the Google Gemini API, specif-ically the Gemini 2.0 Flash model, to dynamically create pro-gressive learning stages. The LLM receives structured prompts containing six available actions which are: "Stand", "Hit", "Double Down", "Split", "Early Surrender" and "Insurance" with manually defined complexity levels 1-3, where Stand and Hit are considered as complexity level 1, Double Down and Split as level 2 and Early Surrender and Insurance as level 3. This complexity ranking is based on the actions’ roles in the game. Stand and Hit are the basic game options, Double Down and Split are additional strategies, and Surrender and Insurance have further-reaching consequences like ending the game. The system then generates curriculum stages with adaptive success thresholds based on the win rate and progressive action introduction based on complexity. 

## 3.2 LLM Prompting and Curriculum Workflow 

Our adaptive curriculum is driven by a structured workflow that cy-cles between curriculum generation, agent training, and performance-based adaptation. This process is orchestrated through carefully designed prompts to the LLM. 

Initial Curriculum Generation. The process begins by prompt-ing the Gemini 2.0 Flash model to generate an initial multi-stage curriculum. We use conservative decoding settings (temperature 0.2, top-𝑝 0.9) to ensure consistent, structured output. The ini-tial prompt provides the LLM with the complete context of the task, including: (i) the environment configuration (e.g., 8-deck), (ii) the full set of available actions grouped by complexity, and (iii) an explicit JSON format that the output must follow. This for-mat defines the structure for each stage, specifying its name, the subset of available actions, a descriptive goal, and a target suc-cess threshold. An example of this prompt is shown in Listing 1. 

Listing 1: Example LLM prompt for curriculum generation and adaptation. The ‘Last stage summary‘ field is used in the feedback loop.                                      

> SYSTEM : You are designing aBlackjack learning curriculum . USER : Environment : deck =8 - deck , penetration =0.9 Actions : 0= Stand ,1= Hit ,2= Double ,3= Split ,4= Surrender ,5= Insurance Complexity : {1:[0 ,1] , 2:[2 ,3] , 3:[4 ,5]} Last stage summary : { id :3 , win_rate :0.455 , bust_rate :0.31 , errors :[ " over - hitting hard 15 vs 10 " ]} Return ONLY JSON with fields : {" stage_id ": int , " name ": str , " available_actions " :[ ints ], " description ": str , " difficulty ": int [1..5] , " success_threshold ": float in [0.35 , 0.50]}

Adaptive Training Loop. Once the curriculum is established, the agent begins training in Stage 1. The core of our framework is an adaptive loop that uses a progressive training budget for each stage. The number of episodes allocated per stage increases with its difficulty to provide more training time for complex actions. Performance is evaluated, and the feedback loop with the LLM is triggered when one of two conditions is met: either the agent achieves the stage’s predefined success threshold (e.g., a target win rate) or it exhausts its allocated episode budget for that stage (capped at a maximum of 100,000 episodes). At this point, a compact performance summary, including metrics like win rate and common errors (as seen in Listing 1), is sent back to the LLM. The LLM is then prompted to act as a coach, deciding whether the agent is ready to advance or if it needs to continue training. This feedback mechanism allows the LLM to dynamically manage the agent’s progression. 

Robustness and Enforcement. To ensure reliable operation, the system incorporates several robustness measures. The LLM’s JSON responses are strictly validated against the required format. In case of malformed output or API failures, a retry mechanism is triggered; if the issue persists, the system can fall back to a pre-generated curriculum file to ensure experiments can run offline. Throughout our experiments, this fallback mechanism was never triggered. The combination of structured prompting and the retry logic was suffi-cient to handle any intermittent API issues, demonstrating the high reliability of the LLM for this structured generation task. Within the training loop, the curriculum is enforced by the environment, which masks any actions that are not part of the current stage. The environment also enforces all game rules (e.g., disallowing a Double Down after the first two cards), which prevents the agent from learning invalid policies and simplifies credit assignment. 

## 3.3 Blackjack Environment 

We implement Blackjack with full casino rules with multiple deck configurations (infinite, 1-deck, 4-deck, 8-deck) and configurable penetration. The dealer’s behavior is encoded in the environment, and the game seats are occupied by separate RL agents. We play with two agents in our experiments. 

Observations . The observations include: player total, The ob-servation space is designed to provide the agent with all necessary information for strategic play. It includes the player’s current total, the dealer’s visible up-card, and a set of binary flags. These flags specify: (i) if the player’s hand is "soft"—meaning it contains an Ace that can be counted as 11 without busting, a crucial distinction for optimal strategy—and (ii) which tactical actions (split, double, surrender, insurance) are currently legal to play. For experiments with finite decks, we also provide card-counting features (the run-ning count and true count) to allow the agent to learn policies that adapt to the composition of the remaining shoe. 

Reward Design . The base reward is +1 (win), 0 (push), -1 (loss), with +1.5 for blackjack. We add small strategic shaping only where consistent with casino expected value: validated double downs re-ceive multiplicative payouts and invalid doubles are disallowed; successful insurance pays 2:1 but is typically negative expected value and thus rarely selected; early surrender yields -0.5 by design DAI ’25, Nov 21 - 24, 2025, London, United Kingdom Alasti, et al. 

Figure 1: The adaptive, LLM-guided curriculum learning framework. (1) Generation & Adaptation: An LLM generates an initial curriculum stage. After a training phase, the agent’s performance summary is fed back to the LLM, which adapts the curriculum by deciding whether to advance the agent to the next stage. (2) Training Loop: The agent’s training is constrained by the current curriculum stage, which masks unavailable actions in the environment to focus exploration. 

but can be optimal in specific high-risk matchups. This reward shap-ing encourages robust tactics without biasing toward unrealistic strategies. 

## 3.4 Agent Setup 

To evaluate the impact of our curriculum across different learning paradigms, we implement and compare two distinct agent archi-tectures. Each agent type is trained independently to solve the Blackjack environment. 

DQN Agent: A simple MLP architecture (6 →128 →128 →4) with experience replay buffer size 100,000, target network updates every 1,000 steps, and 𝜖 -greedy exploration. Learning rate 0.0005 with stage-based adaptation. 

Tabular Agent: Direct Q-value lookup with adaptive learning rate of 0.1, frequency-based adjustment, and 𝜖 -greedy exploration. 

Adaptive Learning Rate Strategy . The system implements adaptive learning rates that adjust based on curriculum stage pro-gression and state visit frequency. For the DQN agent, the learning rate increases by 20% when advancing to stage 3 or higher, allowing faster adaptation to complex strategies. The tabular agent employs frequency-based learning rate adjustment: 𝛼 = 𝛼 0/( 1+visit_count ),where 𝛼 0 is the initial learning rate (0.1) and visit_count tracks state-action pair frequency. This approach ensures stable learning for frequently visited states while maintaining exploration for rare scenarios. 

Exploration Strategy and Epsilon Decay . Both agents employ 

𝜖 -greedy exploration with exponential decay. The DQN agent uses a decay rate of 0.99995 , while the tabular agent uses 0.9999 for faster convergence. Epsilon starts at 1.0 and decays to a minimum of 0.05, ensuring a balance between exploration and exploitation throughout training. The decay process allows agents to gradually shift from random exploration to exploiting learned strategies. 

Baseline . Our baseline comparison uses standard training with-out curriculum learning, where agents have access to all actions from episode 1. Experiments compare this baseline against curricu-lum learning across multiple deck configurations (infinite, 1-deck, 4-deck, 8-deck with 90% penetration). Final evaluation uses 100,000 episodes for performance assessment. 

## 4 Evaluation 

To assess the effectiveness of our LLM-guided curriculum, we con-ducted a series of experiments comparing it against a baseline without curriculum learning. Our evaluation is designed to mea-sure improvements in final performance, training efficiency, and learned strategy quality. 

## 4.1 Experimental Setup 

Our primary analysis focuses on the most realistic casino setting: an 8-deck shoe with 90% penetration. While we focus on the 8-deck case in the main paper, a comparative analysis for other configura-tions (1-deck, 4-deck, and infinite-deck) is provided in Appendix A.2. The baseline for comparison is a standard RL agent trained without a curriculum, meaning it has access to all six actions from the beginning of training. 

Training Protocol and Statistical Robustness. For both cur-riculum and baseline approaches, each agent type (DQN and Tabu-lar) was trained for 500,000 episodes. Final performance was evalu-ated over a separate 100,000 episodes to ensure stable estimates. To ensure the statistical robustness of our results, all experiments were repeated for 10 independent runs using different random seeds. For each of these 10 curriculum runs, the LLM was engaged dy-namically throughout the training process. After the completion of each stage, a performance summary was sent to the LLM, which then determined whether the agent should advance. This per-run, adaptive interaction tests the robustness of our LLM-as-a-coach framework. 

Performance Metrics. We evaluate agent performance using several metrics: final win rate, average per-episode reward, and bust rate. We also analyze training efficiency by measuring wall-clock training time and the number of episodes required to reach peak performance. Finally, we conduct a qualitative analysis of the agents’ learned policies using strategy heatmaps. 

Reproducibility. To ensure our work is fully reproducible, we release all source code, experiment scripts, and configuration files. We also provide the JSON logs for every training and evaluation run, which include explicit random seeds, episode budgets, and stage thresholds. All figures and tables in this paper are generated Learning to Play Blackjack: A Curriculum Learning Perspective DAI ’25, Nov 21 - 24, 2025, London, United Kingdom 

directly from these logs using our public analysis scripts, available at: https://github.com/LUH-AI-devnerds/llm-guided-curriculum-rl. 

## 4.2 Quantitative Results 

Our experimental results show that the LLM-guided curriculum provides significant advantages in both final performance 6 and training efficiency, particularly for the DQN agent. As shown in the left Figure 6, the curriculum-trained DQN agent consistently achieves a higher win rate distribution. On average, its best win rate was 47.41%, a substantial improvement over the 43.97% 2 achieved by the baseline agent. This performance gain was accompanied by a significant reduction in risk-taking, as the average bust rate fell from 32.9% for the baseline to 28.0% for the curriculum agent. 

Table 1: Win rate by curriculum stage (8-deck). The values represent the best observed win rate for a single run at each stage. 

Stage Available Actions DQN (%) Tabular (%) 1: Hit/Stand 0,1 42.24 39.74 2: +Double 0,1,2 42.37 38.72 3: +Split (no Double) 0,1,3 45.54 38.78 4: Full Basic (0–3) 0,1,2,3 49.42 38.15 5: +Insurance 0,1,2,3,5 48.66 40.00 6: +Surrender 0,1,2,3,4 46.57 37.78 7: All Actions 0,1,2,3,4,5 44.63 37.90 

Training Efficiency. The curriculum dramatically improves agent efficiency for both architectures. The DQN agent, in particu-lar, saw a significant acceleration: the curriculum-trained agents completed their entire training protocol in an average of only 12.52 minutes . In contrast, the baseline agent’s average training time was approximately 48.4 minutes. The fact that the curriculum agent can be fully trained in a fraction of the time it takes to merely evaluate the baseline demonstrates a substantial improvement in the overall workflow. Efficiency gains were also clear for the simpler Tabular Q-learning agent, which saw its average training time reduced from one minute for the baseline approach to just 40 seconds with the curriculum. 

Stage-wise Analysis. The stage-wise evolution plot in Figure 3 and the data in Table 1 clearly show the agent’s performance pro-gressively improving and then peaking. Agents most frequently achieve their peak performance at Stage 4 ("Full Basic"), a finding supported by the distribution shown in the top-right panel of the fig-ure. With this full basic strategy available, our DQN agent reaches a win rate of an impressive 49 .42% . Performance often stabilizes or slightly degrades in later stages. This is further confirmed by our comparison of final and all-time best win rates in Figure 7, where most points lie below the diagonal, indicating the final performance was often lower than the peak. We theorize that the reason for per-formance decay later on is the high complexity of the Insurance and Surrender actions. These are only required in specialized strategies with otherwise high risks, making them much harder to apply. Even in later stages of the curriculum, however, the win rate stays above the baseline win rate, only falling as low as 44 .63% .

DQN and Tabular Comparison. Figure 7 illustrates the per-formance gap between the two agent types. As detailed in Table 1, the Tabular agent’s peak win rate was only 49%, significantly lower than the DQN’s peak of 49.42%. The Tabular agent’s limited capacity prevents it from learning the nuanced, state-conditional strategies that the DQN’s function approximator can capture, resulting in a less effective final policy with a higher bust rate. Even in this case, however, the curriculum is useful. This demonstrates that the complexity of the learning algorithm is less of a factor in the success of our curriculum than the complexity of the environment. 

## 4.3 Qualitative Strategy Analysis 

To understand how the curriculum improves performance, we vi-sualized the learned policies of the DQN agents using strategy heatmaps (Figures 4 and 5). This qualitative analysis reveals a strong difference in the learned strategies. The agent trained without a curriculum learns a hesitant and unstructured policy. Its strategy map is diffuse, concentrating al-most exclusively on hitting and standing. We can see that the main deciding factor between hitting and standing is the player’s sum, where at a value of 12, the agent switches to predominantly stand-ing compared to hitting below 12. The dealer’s sum does not play a large role in this decision. It also fails to learn the proper conditions for using high-value tactical actions like Double Down and Split, even in obviously advantageous situations (e.g., a player’s hand of 11 compared to the dealer’s 6). This leads to under-utilization of good opportunities and over-hitting in marginal situations. In contrast, the agent trained with the curriculum learns a crisp, coherent policy that closely resembles established Blackjack basic strategy. The staged introduction of actions allows it to master each one in turn. Its final strategy map shows clear, well-defined regions for standing (e.g., on 12-16 for a dealer’s bust card), doubling down (e.g., on hard 10-11), and splitting pairs (e.g., Aces and 8s). This confirms that the curriculum does not merely boost metrics but fun-damentally guides the agent toward learning a more sophisticated and strategically sound decision-making process. 

## 4.4 Limitations and Future Work 

Our study, while demonstrating the promise of LLM-guided curric-ula for Blackjack, has several limitations that suggest avenues for future work. The proposed action curriculum approach is highly effective for environments like Blackjack with a discrete, well-defined, and separable action space. However, the applicability of this specific method to other domains is an open question. Its effectiveness may be limited in environments with continuous action spaces (e.g., robotics) or where actions are not easily isolated into meaningful subsets of increasing complexity. Future research should explore adapting this concept to a broader range of RL problems. 

Dependence on a Specific LLM. . Our framework relies on the Gemini-2.0-flash-001 model accessed via a public API. This intro-duces two potential threats to validity. First, since the underlying DAI ’25, Nov 21 - 24, 2025, London, United Kingdom Alasti, et al. 

Figure 2: Win rate progression for baseline DQN and Tabular agents trained without a curriculum. The DQN agent’s performance is highly volatile, illustrating the instability and exploration challenges that arise when the full action space is introduced at once. 

Figure 3: Win rate progression for DQN and Tabular agents trained with the LLM-guided curriculum. The curriculum provides a stable learning trajectory for the DQN agent, preventing the performance volatility seen in baseline training and allowing it to converge to a high and consistent win rate. 

model can be updated by its provider at any time, the strict re-producibility of the generated curriculum cannot be guaranteed indefinitely. Second, our findings are specific to this particular LLM. Different models (e.g., GPT-4, Llama) may possess different rea-soning capabilities and inherent biases, which could lead them to generate substantially different and potentially more or less effec-tive curricula. 

Curriculum Monotonicity. Our results indicate that agent per-formance peaks at an intermediate stage of the curriculum (Stage 4), after which the introduction of more situational actions leads to a decline in win rate. A limitation of our current adaptive frame-work is its monotonic nature: it only allows the agent to progress forward with the goal of eventually using all actions. It does not include a mechanism to determine if settling on a restricted action space indefinitely is a better choice. An extended version of our curriculum could contain such an option. 

Scope of the Simulation. Finally, while our 8-deck environment is a realistic simulation of the card game, it does not capture all aspects of real-world casino play. We do not model betting strategies or dynamic table limits, which are crucial for managing bankroll and can influence the expected value of actions like Insurance and Early Surrender, especially when combined with card counting. Since our results are very promising for basic strategy play, a deeper setting supporting such advanced play could prove to be an interesting future avenue for research. 

## 5 Conclusion 

This work presents a novel LLM-guided action curriculum learning framework for reinforcement learning in the Blackjack domain, demonstrating the effectiveness of combining language model intel-ligence with structured curriculum design. We find that introducing actions one by one based on an LLM plan allows Q-Learning agents to reach expert-level win rates in realistic 8-deck settings, surpass-ing non-curriculum variants both in terms of performance and sample efficiency. These results show that the system effectively manages progres-sive complexity introduction through adaptive success thresholds and learns meaningful policies corresponding to real Blackjack play. While these are impressive results, our setting does not yet inte-grate explicit card-counting and betting decisions to study bankroll growth under risk constraints. Furthermore, we use casino rules, Learning to Play Blackjack: A Curriculum Learning Perspective DAI ’25, Nov 21 - 24, 2025, London, United Kingdom 

Figure 4: A strategy heatmap for an agent trained with a curriculum. Rows are the player’s sum, columns are the dealer’s up card. Cell colors represent the chosen action. The strategy appears more structured than the no curriculum-trained agent. 

but Blackjack also features richer rule sets like "dealer hits soft 17". These could be valuable extensions for studying RL on Black-jack. We also believe that our action-based curriculum extends to a broader set of tactical decision-making tasks beyond Black-jack. Especially with further extensions like adaptive thresholds, action-based curricula could enable efficient task decomposition and learning across many complex RL tasks. 

## References 

[1] Rishabh Agarwal, Chen Liang, Dale Schuurmans, and Mohammad Norouzi. 2019. Learning to Generalize from Sparse and Underspecified Rewards. In Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning (Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, Vol. 97) , Kamalika Chaudhuri and Ruslan Salakhutdinov (Eds.). PMLR, 130–140. https://proceedings.mlr.press/v97/agarwal19e.html [2] Mir Ihrar Ali. 2025. Evaluating Blackjack Strategy Models. (2025). [3] A. Bakhtin, D. Wu, A.Lerer, J. Gray, A. Jacob, G. Farina, A. Miller, and N. Brown. 2023. Mastering the Game of No-Press Diplomacy via Human-Regularized Reinforcement Learning and Planning. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR . OpenReview.net. [4] Yoshua Bengio, Jérôme Louradour, Ronan Collobert, and Jason Weston. 2009. Curriculum learning. In Proceedings of the 26th Annual International Conference on Machine Learning (Montreal, Quebec, Canada) (ICML ’09) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 41–48. https://doi.org/10.1145/ 1553374.1553380 [5] Yuji Cao, Huan Zhao, Yuheng Cheng, Ting Shu, Yue Chen, Guolong Liu, Gaoqi Liang, Junhua Zhao, Jinyue Yan, and Yun Li. 2025. Survey on Large Language Model-Enhanced Reinforcement Learning: Concept, Taxonomy, and Methods. 

IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems 36, 6 (2025), 9737– 9757. https://doi.org/10.1109/TNNLS.2024.3497992 [6] Yuji Cao, Huan Zhao, Yuheng Cheng, Ting Shu, Yue Chen, Guolong Liu, Gaoqi Liang, Junhua Zhao, Jinyue Yan, and Yun Li. 2025. Survey on Large Language Model-Enhanced Reinforcement Learning: Concept, Taxonomy, and Methods. 

IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems 36, 6 (2025), 9737– 9757. https://doi.org/10.1109/TNNLS.2024.3497992 [7] Lin Chen, Bruno Scherrer, and Peter L. Bartlett. 2021. Infinite-Horizon Offline Re-inforcement Learning with Linear Function Approximation: Curse of Dimension-ality and Algorithm. arXiv:2103.09847 [cs.LG] https://arxiv.org/abs/2103.09847 [8] Charles De Granville. [n. d.]. Applying reinforcement learning to blackjack using q-learning. University of Oklahoma ([n. d.]). [9] Yuqing Du, Olivia Watkins, Zihan Wang, Cédric Colas, Trevor Darrell, Pieter Abbeel, Abhishek Gupta, and Jacob Andreas. 2023. Guiding Pretraining in Re-inforcement Learning with Large Language Models. In Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning (Proceedings of Machine Learn-ing Research, Vol. 202) , Andreas Krause, Emma Brunskill, Kyunghyun Cho, Bar-bara Engelhardt, Sivan Sabato, and Jonathan Scarlett (Eds.). PMLR, 8657–8677. https://proceedings.mlr.press/v202/du23f.html [10] T. Eimer, A. Biedenkapp, F. Hutter, and M. Lindauer. 2024. Self-Paced Context Evaluation for Contextual Reinforcement Learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML (Proceedings of Machine Learning Research) . 2948–2958. [11] Peter A Griffin. 1999. The theory of blackjack: the compleat card counter’s guide to the game of 21 . Huntington Press, Las Vegas, NV. [12] Calum Corrie Imrie, Ioannis Stefanakos, Sepeedeh Shahbeigi, Richard Hawkins, and Simon Burton. 2025. Assuring the Safety of Reinforcement Learning Compo-nents: AMLAS-RL. arXiv:2507.08848 [cs.LG] https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.08848 [13] Frederick James. 1980. Monte Carlo theory and practice. Reports on progress in Physics 43, 9 (1980), 1145. DAI ’25, Nov 21 - 24, 2025, London, United Kingdom Alasti, et al. 

Figure 5: A strategy heatmap for an agent trained without a curriculum. Rows are the player’s sum, columns are the dealer’s up card. Cell colors represent the chosen action. The strategy appears less structured than the curriculum-trained agent. 

Figure 6: A statistical summary of agent performance over 10 independent runs in the 8-deck curriculum environment. The results highlight the DQN agent’s significantly higher peak performance distribution (left) and confirm that this peak is most frequently achieved at Stage 4 (right). The high stage completion rate for both agents (middle) indicates the curriculum was well-paced and successfully navigated in most runs. Learning to Play Blackjack: A Curriculum Learning Perspective DAI ’25, Nov 21 - 24, 2025, London, United Kingdom 

Figure 7: Deeper analysis of agent performance, showing a positive correlation between the number of curriculum stages completed and the best achieved win rate for the DQN agent (left). However, the agent’s final performance is often lower than its peak (middle), reinforcing the finding, quantified in the summary (right), that the optimal policy is achieved at an intermediate stage. 

[14] Sooyoung Jang and Mikyong Han. 2018. Combining Reward Shaping and Cur-riculum Learning for Training Agents with High Dimensional Continuous Ac-tion Spaces. In 2018 International Conference on Information and Communication Technology Convergence (ICTC) . 1391–1393. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICTC.2018. 8539438 [15] P. Klink, H. Yang, C. D’Eramo, J. Peters, and J. Pajarinen. 2022. Curriculum Reinforcement Learning via Constrained Optimal Transport. In International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML (Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, Vol. 162) , Kamalika Chaudhuri, Stefanie Jegelka, Le Song, Csaba Szepesvári, Gang Niu, and Sivan Sabato (Eds.). PMLR, 11341–11358. [16] J. Lee, J. Hwangbo, L. Wellhausen, V. Koltun, and M. Hutter. 2020. Learning Quadrupedal Locomotion over Challenging Terrain. Science in Robotics 5 (2020). [17] Zhengyang Li, Qijin Ji, Xinghong Ling, and Quan Liu. 2025. A Comprehensive Review of Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning in Video Games. (Jan. 2025). https://doi.org/10.36227/techrxiv.173603149.94954703/v1 [18] William Liang, Sam Wang, Hung-Ju Wang, Osbert Bastani, Dinesh Jayaraman, and Yecheng Jason Ma. 2024. Environment curriculum generation via large language models. In 8th Annual Conference on Robot Learning .[19] Chenbei Lu, Laixi Shi, Zaiwei Chen, Chenye Wu, and Adam Wierman. 2024. Overcoming the Curse of Dimensionality in Reinforcement Learning Through Approximate Factorization. arXiv:2411.07591 [cs.LG] https://arxiv.org/abs/2411. 07591 [20] Yecheng Jason Ma, William Liang, Guanzhi Wang, De-An Huang, Osbert Bastani, Dinesh Jayaraman, Yuke Zhu, Linxi Fan, and Anima Anandkumar. 2024. Eureka: Human-Level Reward Design via Coding Large Language Models. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR . OpenReview.net. [21] M. Matthews, M. Beukman, B. Ellis, M. Samvelyan, M. Jackson, S. Coward, and J. Foerster. 2024. Craftax: A Lightning-Fast Benchmark for Open-Ended Rein-forcement Learning. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML . OpenReview.net. [22] Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Alex Graves, Ioannis Antonoglou, Daan Wierstra, and Martin Riedmiller. 2013. Playing Atari with Deep Reinforcement Learning. arXiv:1312.5602 [cs.LG] https://arxiv.org/abs/1312.5602 [23] Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Andrei A. Rusu, Joel Veness, Marc G. Bellemare, Alex Graves, Martin Riedmiller, Andreas K. Fidjeland, Georg Ostrovski, Stig Petersen, Charles Beattie, Amir Sadik, Ioannis Antonoglou, Helen King, Dharshan Kumaran, Daan Wierstra, Shane Legg, and Demis Hassabis. 2015. Human-level control through deep reinforcement learning. Nature 518, 7540 (Feb. 2015), 529–533. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature14236 [24] Sanmit Narvekar, Bei Peng, Matteo Leonetti, Jivko Sinapov, Matthew E. Taylor, and Peter Stone. 2020. Curriculum learning for reinforcement learning domains: a framework and survey. J. Mach. Learn. Res. 21, 1, Article 181 (Jan. 2020), 50 pages. [25] Sanmit Narvekar, Bei Peng, Matteo Leonetti, Jivko Sinapov, Matthew E Taylor, and Peter Stone. 2020. Curriculum learning for reinforcement learning domains: A framework and survey. Journal of Machine Learning Research 21, 181 (2020), 1–50. [26] L. Ouyang, J. Wu, X. Jiang, D. Almeida, C. Wainwright, P. Mishkin, C. Zhang, S. Agarwal, K. Slama, A. Ray, J. Schulman, J. Hilton, F. Kelton, L. Miller, M. Simens, A. Askell, P. Welinder, P. Christiano, J. Leike, and R. Lowe. 2022. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback. In NeurIPS .[27] Jack Parker-Holder, Minqi Jiang, Michael Dennis, Mikayel Samvelyan, Jakob N. Foerster, Edward Grefenstette, and Tim Rocktäschel. 2022. Evolving Curricula with Regret-Based Environment Design. In International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML (Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, Vol. 162) , Kamalika Chaudhuri, Stefanie Jegelka, Le Song, Csaba Szepesvári, Gang Niu, and Sivan Sabato (Eds.). PMLR, 17473–17498. [28] Rémy Portelas, Cédric Colas, Katja Hofmann, and Pierre-Yves Oudeyer. 2019. Teacher algorithms for curriculum learning of Deep RL in continuously pa-rameterized environments. In 3rd Annual Conference on Robot Learning, CoRL (Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, Vol. 100) , Leslie Pack Kaelbling, Danica Kragic, and Komei Sugiura (Eds.). PMLR, 835–853. [29] Martin L Puterman. 1990. Markov decision processes. Handbooks in operations research and management science 2 (1990), 331–434. [30] Kanghyun Ryu, Qiayuan Liao, Zhongyu Li, Payam Delgosha, Koushil Sreenath, and Negar Mehr. 2025. CurricuLLM: Automatic Task Curricula Design for Learn-ing Complex Robot Skills using Large Language Models. arXiv:2409.18382 [cs.RO] https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.18382 [31] Michael Shackleford. 2024. Blackjack Appendix 9: Rule Variations. https:// wizardofodds.com/games/blackjack/appendix/9/. Accessed: August 9, 2025. [32] Bharat Singh, Rajesh Kumar, and Vinay Pratap Singh. 2022. Reinforcement learning in robotic applications: a comprehensive survey. Artif. Intell. Rev. 55, 2 (Feb. 2022), 945–990. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10462-021-09997-9 [33] Raghavendra Srinivasaiah, Vinai George Biju, Santosh Kumar Jankatti, Raviku-mar Hodikehosahally Channegowda, and Niranjana Shravanabelagola Jinachan-dra. 2024. Reinforcement learning strategies using Monte-Carlo to solve the blackjack problem. International Journal of Electrical and Computer Engineering (IJECE) 14, 1 (2024), 904–910. [34] Richard S Sutton, Andrew G Barto, et al . 1998. Reinforcement learning: An intro-duction . Vol. 1. MIT press Cambridge. [35] Gerald Tesauro et al . 1995. Temporal difference learning and TD-Gammon. 

Commun. ACM 38, 3 (1995), 58–68. [36] Edward O Thorp. 1966. Beat the dealer: a winning strategy for the game of twenty-one . Vintage. [37] M. Vasco, T. Seno, K.Kawamoto, K. Subramanian, P. Wurman, and P. Stone. 2024. A Super-human Vision-based Reinforcement Learning Agent for Autonomous Racing in Gran Turismo. RLJ 4 (2024), 1674–1710. [38] Guanzhi Wang, Yuqi Xie, Yunfan Jiang, Ajay Mandlekar, Chaowei Xiao, Yuke Zhu, Linxi Fan, and Anima Anandkumar. 2023. Voyager: An open-ended embodied agent with large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.16291 (2023). [39] Christopher JCH Watkins and Peter Dayan. 1992. Q-learning. Machine learning 

8, 3 (1992), 279–292. [40] Christopher J. C. H. Watkins and Peter Dayan. 1992. Q-learning. Machine Learning 8, 3 (May 1992), 279–292. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00992698 [41] Jan Wöhlke, Felix Schmitt, and Herke van Hoof. 2020. A Performance-Based Start State Curriculum Framework for Reinforcement Learning. In Proceedings of the 19th International Conference on Autonomous Agents and MultiAgent Systems .1503–1511. DAI ’25, Nov 21 - 24, 2025, London, United Kingdom Alasti, et al. 

## A Visualizations of Agent Performance and Strategy A.1 Agent Progression Through Curriculum Stages 

Figure 8 illustrates the performance progression of the DQN agent. A notable dip in win rate is observable at Stage 3, characteristic of learning the complex "Early Surrender" action. 

Figure 8: Performance progression of the DQN agent through a 5-stage curriculum in an 8-deck game. 

## A.2 Comparative Analysis Across Deck Configurations 

The following figures compare the DQN agent against the Tabular baseline across different deck sizes. Note the superior win rates and lower bust rates for the DQN agent. 

## A.3 Learned Policy Visualization 

To validate the strategy, we visualize the learned policy at Stage 3. 

## B Prompting for Curriculum Generation B.1 Curriculum Generation Prompt                   

> You are an expert in reinforcement learning curriculum design for Blackjack . Available actions : 0: " Stand -Stay with current hand ", Learning to Play Blackjack: A Curriculum Learning Perspective DAI ’25, Nov 21 - 24, 2025, London, United Kingdom

Figure 9: Comparative analysis in a 1-deck environment. 

Figure 10: Comparative analysis in a 4-deck environment. DAI ’25, Nov 21 - 24, 2025, London, United Kingdom Alasti, et al. 

Figure 11: Comparative analysis in an 8-deck environment. 

Figure 12: Comparative analysis in an infinite-deck environment. Learning to Play Blackjack: A Curriculum Learning Perspective DAI ’25, Nov 21 - 24, 2025, London, United Kingdom 

Figure 13: Heatmap visualization of the DQN agent’s learned policy at Stage 3 ("Introducing Splits"). 

1: " Hit - Draw another card ", 2: " Double Down - Double bet and draw one card ", 3: " Split - Split pair into two hands ", 4: " Early Surrender - Give up hand and lose half bet ", 5: " Insurance - Bet dealer has blackjack when showing Ace ", Design the number of stages that is needed to train RL agents in Blackjack . Each stage should gradually increase complexity and introduce new actions . For each stage , specify : 1. Stage name 2. Available actions ( list of action indices : 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5) 3. Description of learning objectives 4. Difficulty level (1 -3 scale ) 5. Success threshold ( win rate 0.0 -1.0 to advance ) You arent forced to use actions in the order of the list . You can use actions in any order you want . You can even choose to not use an action at all . The complexity of actions are as follows : - Stand : 1- Hit : 1- Early Surrender : 2- Insurance : 2- Double Down : 3- Split : 3Respond in this exact JSON format : {{ " stages ": [{{ " stage_id ": 1, DAI ’25, Nov 21 - 24, 2025, London, United Kingdom Alasti, et al. 

" name ": " Stage Name ", " available_actions ": [0 , 1] , " description ": " Learning objectives ..." , " difficulty ": 1, " success_threshold ": 0.35 }} , ... ], " rationale ": " Explanation of curriculum design ..." }} Focus on progressive skill building and realistic success thresholds . Consider that early surrender ( action 4) and insurance ( action 5) are advanced strategies that should be introduced in later stages after basic strategy is mastered . 

## B.2 Curriculum Adaptation Prompt 

You are analyzing an RL agent 's performance in Blackjack curriculum learning . Current Stage : { current_stage . name } Available Actions : { current_stage . available_actions } Stage Description : { current_stage . description } Success Threshold : { current_stage . success_threshold } Agent Performance : - Win Rate : { performance_summary [ ' win_rate ']:.3 f} - Average Reward : { performance_summary [ ' average_reward ']:.3 f} - Episodes Trained : { performance_summary [ ' episodes_trained ']} - Struggling with actions : { performance_summary [ ' struggling_actions ']} Action Descriptions : { self . action_descriptions } Based on this performance , recommend : 1. Should the agent advance to next stage ? ( yes / no ) 2. What actions should be emphasized in next training episodes ? 3. Any curriculum modifications needed ? You arent forced to use actions in the order of the list . You can use actions in any order you want . You can even choose to not use an action at all . The complexity of actions are as follows : - Stand : 1- Hit : 1- Early Surrender : 3- Insurance : 3- Double Down : 2- Split : 2Respond in JSON format : {{ " advance_stage ": true / false , " recommended_actions ": [ list of action indices to focus on ], " curriculum_modifications ": {{ " adjust_threshold ": 0. XX , " add_actions ": [ list ], " remove_actions ": [ list ] }} , " reasoning ": " Explanation of recommendations ..." }} Learning to Play Blackjack: A Curriculum Learning Perspective DAI ’25, Nov 21 - 24, 2025, London, United Kingdom 

## B.3 Example Generated Curriculum 

{" curriculum_stages ": [{" stage_id ": 1, " name ": " Basic Hit & Stand " , " available_actions ": [0, 1], " description ": " Learn the fundamental actions of hitting and standing . Agent should learn to hit when the hand total is low and stand when it 's high , based on the dealer 's upcard . Focus on memorizing the most basic actions for each hand ." , " difficulty ": 1, " success_threshold ": 0.4 }, {" stage_id ": 2, " name ": " Introduction to Doubling Down " , " available_actions ": [0, 1, 2], " description ": " Introduce the ' Double Down ' action . Agent should learn to recognize advantageous situations for doubling down (e.g., hard 11 , hard 10 against low dealer upcards )." , " difficulty ": 2, " success_threshold ": 0.42 }, {" stage_id ": 3, " name ": " Splitting Pairs " , " available_actions ": [0, 1, 3], " description ": " Introduce the ' Split ' action . Focus on learning when to split pairs (e.g., splitting aces and eights almost always , but learn to avoid splitting 10 s). The game is simplified to avoid ' Double Down ' to allow better focus on the newly introduced action ." , " difficulty ": 3, " success_threshold ": 0.43 }, {" stage_id ": 4, " name ": " Full Basic Strategy " , " available_actions ": [0, 1, 2, 3], " description ": " Combine all basic actions ( Hit , Stand , Double Down , and Split ). Agent must now master a comprehensive basic strategy , choosing the optimal action in various situations . This stage will require the agent to balance all the actions they know , and use them efficiently . It is not expected to become an expert , but to understand how each action should be used in different circumstances ." , " difficulty ": 4, " success_threshold ": 0.45 }, DAI ’25, Nov 21 - 24, 2025, London, United Kingdom Alasti, et al. 

{" stage_id ": 5, " name ": " Insurance Decision " , " available_actions ": [0, 1, 2, 3, 5], " description ": " Introduce ' Insurance '. The agent should learn that insurance is generally abad bet except in very specific card counting scenarios , which are not available now . Agent should learn to almost always decline Insurance . This stage is about learning the expected value of this advanced action ." , " difficulty ": 4, " success_threshold ": 0.45 }, {" stage_id ": 6, " name ": " Early Surrender " , " available_actions ": [0, 1, 2, 3, 4], " description ": " Introduce the ' Early Surrender ' action . The agent should learn when early surrender is advantageous , which typically involves giving up unfavorable hands against astrong dealer upcard ." , " difficulty ": 4, " success_threshold ": 0.46 }, {" stage_id ": 7, " name ": " All Actions Master " , " available_actions ": [0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5], " description ": " The agent can now choose any action in all situations . Mastering all actions requires the agent to intelligently combine all strategies learned to create a holistic and performant strategy ." , " difficulty ": 5, " success_threshold ": 0.47 }]}