Title: TaleBot: A Tangible AI Companion to Support Children in Co-creative Storytelling for Resilience Cultivation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2602.23095v1

Published Time: Fri, 27 Feb 2026 02:18:16 GMT

Number of Pages: 26

Markdown Content:
# TaleBot : A Tangible AI Companion to Support Children in Co-creative Storytelling for Resilience Cultivation 

# Yonglin Chen 

School of Design, Southern University of Science and Technology Shenzhen, China 12531641@mail.sustech.edu.cn 

# Jingjing Zhang 

Picto AITech Hong Kong, China jingjing.zhang97213@gmail.com 

# Kezhuo Wang 

School of Design, Southern University of Science and Technology Shenzhen, China 12333213@mail.sustech.edu.cn 

# Pengcheng An 

School of Design, Southern University of Science and Technology Shenzhen, China anpc@sustech.edu.cn 

# Xueliang Li ∗

School of Design, Southern University of Science and Technology Shenzhen, China lixl6@sustech.edu.cn 

## Abstract 

Resilience is a key factor affecting children’s mental wellbeing and future development. Yet, limited HCI research has explored how to help children build resilience through adversarial experiences. Informed by a formative study with elementary school teachers and professional psychologists, we design TaleBot , an AI-empowered system that supports children to co-create stories about overcoming everyday adversities tailored to their personal situations. We evalu-ated the system with 12 elementary children in school counseling rooms under teacher guidance and conducted reflective interviews with parents upon the Child–AI co-created stories. The findings show that TaleBot encourages children in self-expression of feelings and thoughts, creating opportunities for teachers to provide person-alized support and for parents to better understand the profound impact of family communication on children’s mental wellbeing. We conclude with design implications for using generative AI to support children’s mental health education and interventions across school and family contexts. 

## CCS Concepts 

• Human-centered computing → Empirical studies in HCI .

## Keywords 

Generative AI, Interactive Storytelling, Resilience, Children, Mental Health, HCI 

## 1 Introduction 

Resilience has been reported to be a key factor indicating children’s mental health and is highly relevant to their future life quality [ 15 , 38 ]. Children who demonstrate resilience are more inclined to develop a positive outlook in the face of challenges and to undergo growth after adversity, thereby enhancing their coping mecha-nisms and emotional maturity [ 21 , 38 , 81 ]. Despite its recognized importance, fostering resilience in children remains a longstanding challenge for parents and educators [ 19 , 49 ]. Families play a crucial 

> ∗Corresponding author.

role in socializing children by equipping them with the skills to cope with stressors and recover from everyday adversities, such as small setbacks, performance pressure, and interpersonal conflicts, with parent–child communication serving as a key mechanism for cultivating children’s appropriate responses to stressful circum-stances and fostering resilience building [66, 73]. The lack of posi-tive parent-children interactions may undermine family wellbeing, leaving children more vulnerable to mental health challenges [ 54 ]. On the other hand, traditional school-based approaches often rely on lecture-based teaching and post-adversity interventions, over-looking experiential learning that helps children build resilience as a life skill through self-reflection [ 6, 13 ]. There is a need for more personalized, adaptive, and proactive school-based interventions to promote children’s resilience. Storytelling has been widely integrated in psychological inter-ventions to assist individuals, especially children, to help them develop emotional regulation and problem-solving skills [ 24 , 52 ]. Through guided conversations with the professionals, storytelling provides safe and fictional contexts for children to develop narra-tives to make sense of difficult experiences, drive meaning from them, and build beliefs around these challenging situations [ 23 , 58 ]. However, traditional storytelling methods often require extensive one-on-one professional guidance, and are constrained by the avail-ability of static materials, and limited in providing personalized content at scale [58]. Interactive storytelling systems have emerged as a significant intervention for promoting engagement of children in educational and creative activities in school and family contexts [ 14 , 56 ]. Recent advances in artificial intelligence (AI) have opened new possibilities for enhancing such storytelling systems. AI-powered storytelling tools can provide personalized, adaptive narratives that respond to children’s diverse needs and preferences [ 18 ]. These systems can enable collaborative story creation, supporting both creativity and purposeful narrative exploration [ 29 ]. Most existing AI-based sto-rytelling systems in HCI focus on enhancing specific skills related to children’s intellectual, social, and creative growth [ 36 ], such as critical thinking [ 74 ], literacy [ 45 ], creativity and expressive skills 

> arXiv:2602.23095v1 [cs.HC] 26 Feb 2026 Trovato et al.

[47 ]. However, limited work exists that supports children’s psycho-logical resilience development. In addition, most of these systems only involve parents in peripheral roles without their perspectives and perceptions being fully investigated. More work is needed to understand how the child-AI interactions would engage parents in further reflection on their roles in family communication, in our case, for the purpose of building the children’s resilience. There are following three research questions (RQs): 

• RQ1: How do the children engage the AI-based interactive storytelling system for resilience education? 

• RQ2: How do the child-AI co-created stories engage par-ents in reflection on child-parent communication to better support children’s resilience building? 

• RQ3: What are the design implications of an AI-based in-teractive storytelling system for resilience cultivation? We start our research with a formative study consisting of in-terviews with elementary children’s parents, elementary school mental health teachers, mental health counselors, and psychiatrists. The results of this formative study provide a multi-stakeholder perspective on design requirements for an AI-powered interactive storytelling system for personalized resilience education. Based on these insights, we designed TaleBot , a generative AI-powered system that engages elementary school children in collaborative storytelling with AI, driven by story outlines predefined by men-tal health teachers. TaleBot features two interconnected platforms: a teacher-facing interface (backstage) that enables mental health teachers to customize story outlines for resilience education based on their assessment of each child’s personal circumstances, and a child-facing interface (frontstage) where children engage with a conversational AI to collaboratively generate a story book. During the child-AI interactions, the child is prompted by questions such as “What would you do in this situation if you were this character?”, and the response of the child serves as input for the generation of the story book unfolding on the interface chapter by chapter. Unlike existing storytelling systems focused solely on software, we gave our design a physical form with a 3D-printed PLA shell and a furry fabric outer layer, housing the tablet with its screen facing outside (Fig. 4a). This transforms our design into an embod-ied conversational agent that children can hold and touch during interactions. With TaleBot as the technology probe, we conducted an empirical study involving one school teacher (who is also the school coun-selor), 12 elementary children, and 5 parents of the children. Our prototype was deployed to the counseling room in an elementary school as an assistive tool for the teacher to help the elementary children deal with various everyday adversities. 12 children (6 male, 6 female; aged 7 to 8) were invited to interact with TaleBot to co-create stories with the story outlines predefined by the teacher prior to the session. Observation of the co-creative sessions and post-session interviews with the teacher provided insights into how the system engaged children in expressing personal feelings, thoughts, and coping strategies through imaginary yet personally relevant situations, creating further opportunities for teacher guid-ance and education (RQ1). After each session, the co-created story printed out into a story book for the child to take home as a probe for child-parent communication. In addition, an digital version of the story book annotated with teacher and AI’s commentaries was shared with the parent separately. Based on this, semi-structured interviews were conducted with the parents to understand how the child-AI co-created stories engaged the parents in reflection on their parental practices better support children’s resilience devel-opment (RQ2). Discussions upon the findings of the study provide implications for future design of AI-empowered interactive systems for supporting children’s resilience cultivation (RQ3). This work makes three key contributions to the HCI commu-nity: (1) System design and implementation of TaleBot , an AI-powered interactive storytelling system to engage children in collab-orative storytelling with an converataional agent to create person-alized stories about overcoming daily adversities, thereby fostering resilience development; (2) Empirical insights on how children engage with such AI-powered interactive storytelling systems, and multi-stakeholder perspectives of the teachers and parents towards the implementation of such designs resilience education; and (3) 

Design implications for future AI-powered mental health inter-ventions that provide personalized, adaptive experiences for chil-dren, with appropriate involvement of multiple stakeholders across school and family contexts. 

## 2 Related Work 2.1 Resilience Building through Everyday Adversities for Children 

Psychological resilience, also referred to as mental resilience or in-dividual resilience, refers to the ability of the individual to bounce back to the original state of mind, and even better equipped with coping skills, after going through disadvantageous life situations [20 , 31 , 32 , 43 ]. In particular, Bryan et al. [ 11 ] describe resilience as “a dynamic process encompassing the capacity to maintain regular functioning through diverse challenges or to rebound through the use of facilitative resources.” While early work resilience takes root in trauma-related research on people living through traumatic ex-periences, such as natural disasters and childhood abuse [ 46 , 72 ], recent research on resilience takes insights from positive psychol-ogy, suggesting that resilience can be gained through everyday adversities, such as setbacks and work-related stressors [ 3, 31 , 76 ]. Literature on resilience building emphasizes interventions before, during, and after adversity, which is a "necessary condition" for resilience [ 48 , 70 ], and argues for a mindset that "embraces change and accepts that it is a possible outcome of adversity" [ 39 , 43 ]. This is especially the case for children who demonstrate great psycho-logical flexibility while going through challenging situations, if provided with appropriate support and guidance. Coping with and gaining self-growth from these adversarial situations compose a significant part of the trajectory of children’s psychological de-velopment, enabling them to acquire essential skills to cope with various challenges in future life [15, 19, 27]. Resilience cultivation is a significant component in children’s mental healthcare in schools [ 10 , 25 , 30 ]. However, traditional school-based resilience-building programs for children focus on didactic instruction and post-crisis interventions [ 30 ]. Such ap-proaches overlook the experiential nature of resilience, which is best promoted through reflection on real-life experiences, and may leave the children at risk of long-term effects of unsolved mental TaleBot : A Tangible AI Companion to Support Children in Co-creative Storytelling for Resilience Cultivation 

health challenges. This indicates design opportunities for HCI tech-nologies for providing more situated, personalized, and adaptive solutions for promoting children’s mental health [51]. 

## 2.2 Digital and AI-empowered Mental Health for Children in HCI 

The HCI community has explored a variety of digital technologies to improve children’s mental health. These applications focus on a range of barriers faced by children, such as a lack of mental health literacy, limited parental care, constrained access to professional services, and social stigma [ 68 ]. On the one hand, we have seen overarching, expert-led systems such as screening tools for early de-tection of mental health issues [ 44 ], and VR applications that allow children to enter carefully designed simulated scenarios where they can practice coping with distressing situations in safe, controlled environments [ 37 ]. On the other hand, there are child-centered tech-nologies that support children to gain mental health knowledge and psychological capabilities through child-parent interactions [ 69 ] and serious games with therapeutic skills integrated in the gameplay [ 60 ]. While these digital mental health tools proved their potential to benefit children in their original contexts, they often lack the adaptive and personalization capabilities needed to address the diverse and evolving needs of individual children. With recent advances in Generative AI technologies, such as Large Language Models (LLMs) and text-to-image generation mod-els, AI-based systems have shown the advantage of providing more personalized and appropriate mental health support to children [ 26 , 75 ]. These systems can engage children in natural, conversa-tional interactions and creative activities that are tailored to their individual needs and preferences, while aligned with therapeutic goals. For example, Hui et al. [ 41 ] present an AI-empowered con-versational agent to measure and foster children’s physiological resilience through guided conversations integrating personal and social support factors. DiSandbox [67 ] is an AI-powered sandbox system that supports children in sandbox play under the guidance of AI, while their creations can be used for mental health assessment and to engage parents for timely interventions. EmoEden [71 ] is an AI-based training system to support children with high-functioning autism in emotional learning and social skill development through personalized conversations. Despite the increasing number of AI-empowered systems for supporting children’s mental health, it seems that most applications focus on guided conversations using LLMs, focusing on risk predic-tion or screening while following an expert-led approach [ 26 , 50 ]. The need for providing personalized, adaptive, and proactive in-terventions is not fully met by these applications. And, to our best knowledge, only a few ([ 41 ]) place resilience building as the central effort in designing the systems. We extend our review to digital storytelling systems, which show great potential for delivering per-sonalized and engaging experiences for children while fostering resilience by revisiting adversity and cultivating a positive mindset about such experiences in safe, controlled environments. 

## 2.3 AI-empowered Storytelling Systems 

Interactive storytelling systems, also referred to as storyreading systems by some researchers [ 16 ], are platforms designed to sup-port users in co-creation or interactive reading of stories, often embedded with educational purposes with children as target users. Based on how these systems involve users in interaction with the key story elements, Fan et al. [ 29 ] characterize these systems into three types: emergent storytelling systems where users influence the story development by selecting from predefined narrative ele-ments (characters and backgrounds), character-driven storytelling systems where users enact the stories as one of the characters, and user-centered plotting systems where users dynamically shape he story narratives through decision-making as the stories unfold. AI-empowered storytelling systems show greater potential to provide personalized and engaging experiences for children in in-teraction with such systems. These applications can be understood by examining the different roles played by AI agents in assisting children in co-creating and reading stories. In particular, we have seen how AI assists children in the visualization of stories, as a story illustrator or a visual storyteller, through the integration of text-to-image or image-to-image models. Like StoryDrawer [ 77 ], which engages the children in further elaboration of story elements and transforms these into drawings or sketches. These systems show the advantage of motivating children in imagining and elaborating ideas, while the interactions may rely on children’s verbal or visual expression abilities [ 29 ]. In addition, there are systems where AI, as a plot-writing assistant, supports children in the co-construction of story narratives. For example, StoryPrompt [28 , 29 ] enables the children to set up characters and settings, and to shape the sto-ryline through keywords suggested by the system or their own real-time inputs. Another example is Mathemyths [78 ], which is a voice-based conversational agent that engages children in story co-creation through open-ended questions and scaffolding responses, while embedding mathematical knowledge into the unfolding nar-rative. Challenges in designing such systems are to ensure the consistency and flow of the storylines while incorporating chil-dren’s inputs, which can be random or outside the intended scope. In addition to the above systems that involve the children in the co-creation of story elements, there are also systems that take a more peripheral role, engaging children in conversations around the sto-ries as reading partners. For example, StoryMate [16 ] engages the children in guided conversations, connecting the story context to real-world knowledge to support children’s active thinking. Other similar examples are StoryBuddy [79], and [42]. These works demonstrate the potential of storytelling systems to provide personalized reading experiences and foster meaningful conversations that support a wide range of skills. However, to the best of our knowledge, little research has explored their application in the context of resilience education except [ 42 ] where the AI agent is only involved as a reading partner. In addition, most systems follow a child-centered approach with a lack of consideration for the involvement of multi-stakeholders. While some studies include parent participants, such as parents and teachers (e.g., [ 16 ]), their roles are mostly peripheral, limited to roles as reading companions or instructors. Little is known about their perspectives on how such designs could be integrated into family contexts or their own roles Trovato et al. 

in supporting children’s development, in this case, the cultivation of resilience. 

## 3 Formative Study 

As a preparation for the design phase, we conducted a formative study consisting of semi-structured interviews with key stakehold-ers in children’s resilience education. The study served two pur-poses: first, to understand the current landscape of children’s ad-versity experiences and existing support mechanisms; second, to inform the design of digital storytelling platforms that support involvement of multi-stakeholders for supporting the children’s resilience education. 

## 3.1 Method 

We recruited seven stakeholders: five mental health professionals and two elementary school teachers. The professionals included one child psychiatrist (26 years of experience), three psychological counselors from an independent agency (each with 10+ years of experience in child/adolescent counseling), and one school-based counselor. Both teachers had 25+ years of teaching experience and dealt with students’ mental health issues as homeroom teachers. All participants had substantial experience with children’s mental health. Semi-structured interviews lasted 30-60 minutes. Partici-pants answered four core questions based on their experiences: (1) common adversity scenarios faced by children, (2) maladaptive and adaptive coping responses, (3) current prevention and intervention methods, and (4) perspectives on digital platforms in resilience ed-ucation. All interviews were audio-recorded with the participants’ consent. The interview data were analyzed using systematic the-matic analysis methods [ 40 ]. We followed an iterative process of coding, categorizing, and theme development to identify key in-sights, which inform design requirements for digital systems aimed at supporting children’s resilience. 

## 3.2 Key Findings 

3.2.1 KF1: Children face diverse family and school adversities. Our interviews revealed several adversities contributing to children’s psychological challenges. These include family conflicts from par-ents imposing strict rules on schedules and smartphone use. Many children seeking psychosocial support came from "problematic" families where parents ignore or inappropriately handle their chil-dren’s emotional issues. Children also face adverse school expe-riences like peer relationship tensions or teacher conflicts. One counselor described a child who became depressed after being falsely accused by a teacher of bringing playing cards to class, with parents uncertain how to help. 

3.2.2 KF2: Appropriate Support to help children elaborate their feelings and thoughts. Many participants emphasized the impor-tance of supporting children in expressing their own thoughts and perspectives before drawing conclusions about their situations. The psychiatrist, counselors and teachers shared their techniques in communicating with the children. For example, "To understand from a child’s perspective, what exactly is it that makes them uncomfort-able." Counselors also use the method of scene reproduction: "Use the sand table method or the painting method to present the child’s anger." 

3.2.3 KF3: The Dual Nature of Adversity and Support for Post-adversarial Growth. All participants agreed that adversity serves as both challenges and opportunities for children’s long-term self-growth. The psychiatrist noted: "Such setbacks shape children’s per-sonality formation and may better prepare them for future life." Acounselor compared resilience building to muscle training: "Like building muscle, overcoming difficult situations with positive feedback promotes growth in stress tolerance and cognitive thinking." How-ever, this counselor emphasized that excessive negative feedback is detrimental: "Continuous negative experiences are like constantly looking in a mirror reflecting ’I am not good enough.’ This repeated negative reinforcement limits children’s potential. While moderate failure teaches valuable lessons, success breeds success - positive expe-riences create encouraging feedback that transfers to future challenges, making children progressively more capable." The counselor stressed that adversity should be accompanied by adequate support systems to ensure growth rather than trauma. 

3.2.4 KF4: Barriers and Limitations in Current Support Systems. We recognize each role’s limitations in supporting children through ad-versities. One counselor noted it was "too late" when parents "sent" children to them, expecting professional intervention to simply "fix" issues rooted in unhealthy family communication. Teachers mentioned heavy teaching loads prevented addressing students’ underlying psychological needs, while child-parent conflicts were often the source of depression. The psychiatrist emphasized chang-ing entrenched parental behaviors was the biggest obstacle: "The most difficult part is changing parents’ fixed cognition... I advise them not to communicate with criticism... But they unconsciously revert back to blaming the child... Sometimes even causing secondary harm." 

Teachers could only provide momentary emotional comfort without follow-up. All participants noted lacking communication among teachers, counselors and parents toward shared understanding and collaborative efforts. "Because some parents have particularly bad tempers... as soon as children come home from school, their parents’ faces tend to be gloomy, which can easily lead to family conflicts... some unsafe incidents may occur... As teachers, apart from provid-ing psychological counseling to students, we also offer methodological guidance to parents." These limitations underscore the need for alter-native, child-centered approaches complementing adult-mediated interventions. 

3.2.5 KF5: Child-centered Design with Open-ended Interfaces for Adults’ Participation. All participants agreed on a child-centered approach for designing digital systems supporting children’s men-tal wellbeing and resilience. One counselor emphasized: "Start with emotions first. Children need to be seen, listened to, and understood. When children’s self-identity conflicts with school environment or family expectations, they may feel overlooked or misunderstood." 

This emotional suppression must be addressed in contexts where children develop self-understanding and growth through active learning. Participants emphasized encouraging voluntary partic-ipation and self-exploration through engaging interactions. One counselor recommended incorporating role-play elements, allow-ing "children to step into different roles in simulated scenarios, similar to sandplay therapy." Open-ended systems should provide personal-ized experiences responding to children’s unique circumstances and psychological needs while enabling scaffolded support, as "some TaleBot : A Tangible AI Companion to Support Children in Co-creative Storytelling for Resilience Cultivation 

children think it’s just a minor conflict... However, some children need a week of continuous psychological support." 

## 3.3 Design Requirements 

These insights directly inform five design requirements (DR) for developing personalized AI-empowered storytelling platforms for supporting children’s resilience building: DR#1: personalization of story structures and development that suit individual children’s circumstances and psychological needs (in response to KF1, KF4 and KF5); DR#2: engaging and enjoyable experiences for children through interactive storytelling and child-friendly narratives and visual elements(KF5); DR#3: role-playing mechanism for emotional engagement and elaboration of personal feelings and thoughts (KF2, KF4); DR#4: multi-stakeholder platforms to promote conversations and shared understanding across different groups(KF4, KF5). 

## 4 Designing TaleBot 

## 4.1 System Design 

Based on the five design requirements (DR) derived from our forma-tive study, we developed TaleBot , an interactive storytelling system that engages children in co-storytelling with AI. To fulfill DR#1 , the system features an expert-facing interface, serving as the backstage of the child-AI interaction, which allows the teacher (the school counselor) to customize the story outlines according to each child’s unique circumstances and psychological needs. For DR#2 , TaleBot 

provides a child-facing interface that combines children’s story book narratives, visual elements, and a child-friendly conversa-tional AI. Interaction with the system enables children to co-create a story book with AI, which unfolds in more detail according to the children’s responses to TaleBot’s prompting questions at key story milestones. We also give the child-facing interface a physical form that strengthens the social presence of the conversational AI (Figure 1. left). In line with DR#3 , interaction with the system may encourage the children to project themselves into the story contexts, thus fostering self-expression of feelings and thoughts under similar circumstances. As for DR#4 , the process and out-comes of the child-AI story co-creation can provide opportunities for child-teacher communication during the co-creative process and child-parent conversations on the storybooks after the interactions. Below, we elaborate on specific design features with more details and the underlying rationale. 

4.1.1 Interface Design. TaleBot consists of two primary interfaces: an expert-facing interface for the psychology teacher and a child-facing interface for interactive storytelling. The child-facing in-terface is implemented as a tablet-based application with a Flutter frontend and Python Flask backend architecture. For our user study, the software runs on iPads equipped with custom-designed enclo-sures featuring plush materials, as shown in the Figure 1. The expert-facing interface is a React-based web platform that facilitates story outline generation and task deployment. This in-terface allows experts to generate four-chapter story frameworks through simple text input that describes the setting and plot of the story, serving as the foundation of the story co-creation between the child and TaleBot. Figure 2 shows the interface design for the experts (teacher) to customize a story outline based on analysis of a child’s situation and psychological character. 

4.1.2 AI Architecture Design. We designed a multiple-agent system integrating seven agents to support the generation of the stories with inputs from different sources. Figure 3 illustrates the workflow of this system. Detailed prompt specifications for each agent are provided in Appendix A. 

• Outline Agent (Expert-facing) : This agent generates story outlines which extends the teacher’s input (brief de-scription of a story) into a more structured storyline featur-ing four chapters. This structured story outline drives the development of the story with its details enriched by the children’s responses to TaleBot’s prompting questions at key story milestones. 

• Character Agent : The agent transforms the children’s drawings into story book-style illustrations of characters with a description generated from analysis of the drawing. The image and profile (description) of the character are constantly referred to by the other agents to ensure the consistency of image and text generation. 

• Question Agent : This agent generates corresponding prompt-ing questions depending on the story outlines and character profiles and the current progress of the story development. 

• Writing Agent : This agent synthesizes the children’s re-sponses, the story outlines and character profiles into fully elaborated stories, which are represented by means of four paragraphs corresponding to the story scenarios. 

• Drawing Agent : Based on inputs of Writing Agent and the character image, this agent generates story scenarios in forms of four images with a four-panel layout. 

• Reflection Agent : This agent generates the summary of the story with compliments to the child for finishing the story generation, while highlighting the educational mean-ings of the story. 

• Analysis Agent : This agent generates a psychological anal-ysis of the children’s responses throughout the story co-creation, and provides advice to parents on how to better support the children to overcome similar situations in the future. All questions and story narration within the system are delivered through a child-friendly storytelling voice, integrating the Doubao-voice-synthesis API for text-to-speech conversion. Compared to existing storytelling systems that use predefined or real-time gen-erated keywords as narrative prompts (e.g., [ 29 ]), we utilize voice input to capture children’s natural language during Child-AI con-versations. This functionality also reduces reading requirements, particularly beneficial for young children with limited literacy skills. Regarding the selection of large models, TaleBot selected Deepseek V3 for text generation based on the consideration of its strong per-formance in Chinese language, while OpenAI’s GPT-Image-1 was chosen for image generation to ensure consistent character por-trayal and high visual quality. At the key milestones of the story development (prior to the generation of each chapter), TaleBot poses a prompting question, aksing what the child would do if he or she were in the same situation, The child’s response, captured through Tencent ASR API Trovato et al. 

Figure 1: The TaleBot interface (left) and three primary interaction modes (right). 

Figure 2: The expert-facing interface allows expert to customize personalized storylines for child-AI interactions. Panel (a) shows the outline list that can load data and distribute content to the child-facing interface. Panel (b) displays chapter previews and branching options. Panel (c) shows a story outline customized for participant C1, where Chapter 3 contains two branches: (c)a leads to a positive storyline, while (c)b leads to a negative storyline. Panel (d) demonstrates that when users click on a chapter in the preview panel, they can edit setting descriptions and plot details, or use AI assistance for modifications. 

for accurate speech recognition, is then integrated as the input for the story generation (as mentioned above). Below is an example of Child-AI interaction: 

TaleBot: Bunny is working hard to review for final exams, but as the exam date approaches, it begins to feel nervous and anxious. What do you think Bunny will do next? 

Child user: Take deep breaths. (C1) 

4.1.3 Tangible AI companion for enhanced social presence. To give a physical form to the AI-powered system, we designed a tablet case (with a slot open on its top) taking the appearance of a cute TaleBot : A Tangible AI Companion to Support Children in Co-creative Storytelling for Resilience Cultivation 

Figure 3: The inputs, outputs, and workflows of seven agents. 

animal, covered with the skin made of soft and fuzzy fabrics (as shown in the Figure 1 left.). With this physical form, the child can interact with TaleBot by placing it on the table or holding it in the arms while feeling the soothing experiences touching its fuzzy skin. The screen is split into two sections: the upper part displays eye and mouth animations, and the lower part serves as the operation area. During AI processing delays, the upper section shows a think-ing animations, while during voice playback, it displays speaking animations. 

## 4.2 Design Evaluation 

4.2.1 Participants. We recruited 1 mental health education teacher (the school counselor), 12 elementary students, and 5 of their par-ents through collaboration with a public elementary school. The school serves around one thousand students covering grades of 1 to 6, and is equipped with two mental health education teachers, who are responsible for delivering mental health literacy curric-ula across 6 grades and providing counseling services to students. One of the mental health education teachers was involved in the study as the instructor to assist the children in interaction with the system, as well as the psychological counselor to analyze the chil-dren’s psychological needs and provide support during the child-AI interactions. The students were recruited through two channels: (1) the students who came to the counseling center seeking coun-seling services, and (2) those recommended by their homeroom teachers, who had identified potential psychological needs. After an initial talk with the children to understand their situations and confirming their interest in participation in the study, the teacher then contacted their parents to obtain parental consent. An ongo-ing recruitment strategy was adopted over a period of 3 weeks. A total of 12 elementary students (6 Male, 6 Female; Mean = 7.333 years old, SD = 0.492) and 5 parents (including 1 parent who was a sibling, C10 and C11) voluntarily participated in the study with the consent of their parents. The teacher is well acquainted with all the child participants to ensure a comfortable and trustworthy atmosphere in the study. Table 1 shows the demographic informa-tion of these participants. The study procedure was approved by the ethics committee of the first author’s affiliated university. 

4.2.2 Study context. The user study was conducted in one of the counseling rooms of the mental health center of this primary school. The room was equipped with sofas, tables, and a warm and com-fortable environment. While the psychological teacher provided guidance nearby, like Figure 4a, and the TaleBot children could be placed on the table or held in the arms, like Figure 4b. 

4.2.3 Study Procedure. Prior to the study, the responsible researcher (first author of this paper) had several rounds of preparation meet-ings with the mental health teacher to ensure that she understood the study procedure and became familiar with the TaleBot sys-tem. During the study, the teacher took two roles: as an instructor, guiding the children in their interaction with the system, and as a psychological counselor, engaging in conversations with them to understand their feelings and thoughts while offering appropriate advice. Figure 5 illustrates the overview of the procedure, highlight-ing the involvement of the teacher, the children, and their parents at different steps of the study. 

Personalized Storyline Construction: Before each session, the teacher established a profile for each child participant through analyzing the child’s personality, current psychological situations, and recent adversities they have experienced (Table 2). If needed, the teacher communicated with the homeroom teacher to better understand the children’s current circumstances. With the support of the researcher, the teacher then transformed these personal profiles into story outlines using the expert platform. The teacher was encouraged to create multiple branches in the later stage of the story development, depending on the children’s responses to key story milestones (as indicated in Figure 2). 

Session Setup and Introduction: When children arrived at the school counseling room, the researcher activated the recording equipments, including iPad screen recording, a GoPro camera, and an audio recorder to document the session. After the setup, the researcher left the room and remained on standby next door to Trovato et al. 

Table 1: Participants demographic information Child ID Gender Grade Age Parent ID Gender Age Occupation 

C1 F Grade 2 8 P1 M 38 Finance C2 F Grade 2 8 — — — —C3 M Grade 1 7 — — — —C4 M Grade 1 8 P4 F 48 Housewife C5 M Grade 1 7 — — — —C6 F Grade 1 7 — — — —C7 M Grade 1 7 — — — —C8 M Grade 1 8 P8 M 39 Marketing C9 F Grade 1 7 — — — —C10 F Grade 1 7 P10 M 39 AI Product Manager C11 F Grade 1 7C12 M Grade 1 7 P12 M 35 Marketing  

> (a) (b)

Figure 4: The figure illustrates the study setup in a school counseling room: (a) the teacher (school counselor) (left) guided the children (right) in co-creating a story with TaleBot placed on the table of the counseling room, and (b) the child interacted with 

TaleBot in the arms. 

provide technical support when needed, ensuring the child feels comfortable with only the teacher present. As the beginning of each session, the teacher introduced TaleBot to the child with the following statement: "Today you will experience a toy that lets you tell stories with AI! The AI will ask you four questions as the story continues, and you can answer based on your own ideas. At the end, the AI will create a story book based on your answers." After this, the teacher demonstrated how to interact with TaleBot through co-creating a one-chapter story in front together with the child. Once the child indicated readiness, the formal study began. 

Character Customization: The co-creation with TaleBot began with character customization, in which a visual of the protagonist was generated from the child’s watercolor drawing. The teacher introduced this step by saying: "Now we need a protagonist for the story. You can use these watercolor pens to draw what you want the protagonist to look like." During this process, the teacher prompted the children to think of their favorite animals or cartoon characters as the inspiration, and to assign a name to the protagonist, while ensuring the drawings were completed within 20 minutes. Next to this, the teacher assisted the child in to upload the drawing to TaleBot : A Tangible AI Companion to Support Children in Co-creative Storytelling for Resilience Cultivation 

Figure 5: Study procedure. 

TaleBot which converted it into a more visually polished character, serving as the main character of the story to be co-created. This process could be repeated multiple times within the allocated time until the child is satisfied with the outcome. 

Collaborative Storytelling with TaleBot : TaleBot engaged the children in collaborative storytelling by prompting questions at key story milestones, such as "what would you do if you were [protago-nist’s name] in this situation?" . Based on the inputs of the children, the system generated a story chapter, consisting of four images. During this process, the teacher provided appropriate guidance to ensure children’s attention remained focused on creation and addressed any difficulties they encountered in the interaction. The co-creation of stories ended after four chapters had been generated. 

System Evaluation and Subjective Feedback: After the chil-dren finished the story creation, the teacher guided the children to provide feedback on their interaction experiences through the System Usability Scale (SUS) for Children [ 57 ] and open-ended questions. To accommodate the children’s difficulty in understand-ing the scale and responding with numerical values, the teacher administered the questionnaire through verbal and gestural com-munication (as indicated in Appendix B). The open-ended questions focus on the children’s general experiences interacting with the system, their likes and dislikes during the process, their perceptions of the co-created stories, and how they would like to share these stories with others. The session ended with the teacher compli-menting the children for their participation, ensuring they left the counseling room in a positive emotional state. 

Post-session Reflective Interviews with the Teacher: After the child exited the counseling room, the responsible researcher engaged the teacher in a reflective interview. The questions focused on: 1) the teacher’s general impression of children’s behavior during the session; 2) challenges and difficulties encountered in guiding the children in interacting with the system; 4) insights into the per-sonality, coping behavior and psychological needs of the children as revealed through the session; and 3) the teacher’s perception of how the sytem has facilitated the child-teacher communication on relevant topics. The reflective interviews provided a supplementary view on our analysis of children’s behavior during the interaction sessions, and revealed a teacher’s perspective on our design. 

Semi-structured Interviews with Parents with Annotated Storybooks as Conversational Probes: After the interaction ses-sion, each child received a printed storybook adapted from their co-created stories (with adjustments to the layout of visuals and fonts), and carried it with them to share with their parents. In ad-dition to this, the researcher prepared an annotated version of the storybook for the parents (Appendix E), incorporating the child’s real-time responses at key story milestones, the teacher’s commen-tary on these responses, an analysis of the child’s overall situation, and the advice provided to the parents. Alongside the teacher’s annotations, we also included AI-generated comments to provide a comparative perspective on the same content. The annotated storybooks were delivered digitally to ensure exclusive access for the parents. A semi-structured interview was conducted with the parents one week after they received the annotated storybooks. All the interviews were conducted via online calls. The core interview questions include: 1) What is your impression of the storybook? 2) What is your response to the teacher and AI’s interpretation of the child-AI interaction and their physiological situations? 3) How is your approach to family communication to promote your child’s mental health and cultivate their resilience? 4) What is your attitude towards AI-supported mental health interventions? 

4.2.4 Data Analysis. We collected various types of data from the study, including the original response text in the children’s interac-tion, completed questionnaires, audio recordings of the child–teacher interactions, and semi-structured interviews with parents. We em-ployed a mixed-methods approach to formulate an understanding of how the system engaged the children in child-AI co-creative inter-actions to cultivate resilience (RQ1) and the parents’ attitudes and perspectives towards the AI-based interactive storytelling system for resilience cultivation (RQ2). 

Quantitative Analysis: The SUS for Children responses were analyzed using descriptive statistics, calculating means and stan-dard deviations across all participants. We conducted normality Trovato et al. 

testing using the Shapiro-Wilk test to validate our statistical ap-proach. The resulting SUS scores were interpreted according to established usability benchmarks [ 4] to classify the system’s over-all usability performance. 

Qualitative Analysis: We applied the systematic thematic anal-ysis approach [ 7] to analyze the transcripts of the audio recordings and observation notes. The analysis process involved four iterative phases. First, two researchers (the first and second authors of this paper), both native Chinese speakers fluent in English, indepen-dently reviewed all textual data to develop familiarity with the content. During this phase, we conducted open coding by label-ing significant quotations with descriptive keywords and phrases in English. Second, the two researchers collaboratively organized the initial codes into coherent themes using affinity mapping tech-niques [ 8]. This process involved revisiting original quotations and researcher memos to identify overlaps, resolve conflicts, and address disagreements. Redundant codes were removed while new insights emerging from collaborative discussions were incorporated into the coding framework. Third, a third and fourth researcher (the fourth and corresponding author of this paper) joined the discussion meet-ings to refine the coding scheme developed in the previous step, to ensure a shared understanding within the research team. Following this, the two researchers systematically processed all transcripts, matching quotations to appropriate codes and themes. This struc-tured approach ensured comprehensive coverage of the data while maintaining consistency in interpretation. As a result, the data anal-ysis yielded a total of 164 open codes derived from transcripts of the original recordings across all participating children, parents, and teacher, which were organized into 15 overarching themes. These themes form the foundation for our qualitative findings presented in the results section. 

## 5 Results 

The findings of this study are presented in two parts in response to the two research questions. In Section 5.1, we demonstrated how 

TaleBot engaged the children in the co-creation of stories, which encouraged them to express their feelings and coping strategies in relevant situations ( RQ1 ). We also incorporate the teacher’s perspective towards the system and their experiences of supporting the children in the interaction. In Section 5.2, we elaborated on the parents’ reflection on the Child-AI co-created stories and their views on the potential role of AI-empowered systems for resilience education in family contexts ( RQ2 ). 

## 5.1 Children’s engagement and experiences with the system ( RQ1 )

5.1.1 An overview of Child-AI co-created stories. Based on previ-ous research literature [ 34 ], we look into the stories in terms of the three key story elements in this research, i.e., settings , plots ,and characters . The settings and plots were predefined by the teacher based on their understanding of the children’s personal circumstances and recent daily adversities, and the characters were generated from the children’s drawings and prompt inputs. Appen-dix C shows an overview of the settings, plots, and characters of the stories predefined by the teacher, and co-created by the children and TaleBot . Overall, the teacher customized 12 story outlines for all the children, combining their personal circumstances, personalities, and recently experienced adversities. The co-created narratives unfold across familiar environments, with settings in school pre-dominating: classrooms (C2, C4, C5, C10), playgrounds (C3, C7, C9, C11, C12), examination rooms (C1), and teacher offices (C6, C8). Two stories (C7, C10) extend into home environments, bridging school and family contexts. The plots of these stories explore four interconnected dimen-sions of childhood adversity, with individual narratives often ad-dressing multiple challenges simultaneously. Academic performance anxiety drives plots about test-related stress and fear of failure (C1, C4, C5), while emotional dysregulation through scenarios involv-ing anger, frustration, and mood management (C2, C3, C6, C8, C9, C11). Peer interaction challenges shape plots about friendship and social inclusion (C3, C7, C9, C10, C11, C12), and behavioral com-pliance issues create plot tensions around conflicts with authority and rule-following (C6, C8, C12). This plot mirrors children’s lived experiences, where academic, emotional, social, and behavioral challenges rarely occur in isolation. The characters created based on children’s preferences demon-strate diversity. While most children (n=10) chose human characters as their story avatars—comprising six boys (C3, C4, C5, C7, C8, C12) and four girls (C2, C6, C9, C11)—two children opted for animal pro-tagonists: a rabbit named Bunny (C1) and a kangaroo called Xiaoai (C10). All protagonists were designed to mirror the children’s own developmental stage, facilitating identification and engagement. 

5.1.2 Children’s interaction experiences with the system. The data collected from the SUS followed a normal distribution, as confirmed by the Shapiro-Wilk test (W = 0.973, p = 0.943 > 0.05), validating the subsequent statistical analysis. The SUS scores (Mean = 81.09, SD = 9.80) are classified as excellent on both the group level and the individual level, and were referred to established benchmarks in prior literature [ 4 ]. As shown in Figure 6, the scores of singular question items show overall positive results, except for Q10 and Q12. Regarding Q10 ( "I have to learn a lot to use this system well." ), Some participants gave lower scores for the following reasons: C3, C4, and C9 all mentioned they might need adult help. C5 and C6 raised cognitive concerns: "You need to learn to read first before you can play." For Q12 ("If I have time, I will continue to play with this system."), C4 cited family rules: "My mom doesn’t let me play with too many electronic devices." C6 viewed the system more as a "toy," saying, "If I find something more fun, I won’t play with this." 

On the individual level, most children reported above-standard positive scores about their use experiences with the system, except for C9. Respondents considered family rules not only for Q10 and Q12 mentioned above, but also for other questions. For example, regarding Q1 ("If I had this software on my tablet, I think I would play it often."), C9 first said, "My parents don’t allow me to play with tablets." When the teacher asked what if they could, C9 replied, "I might only be able to play on weekends." For Q3 ("I think this system is easy to use"), C9 considered dislike of drawing: "I’m too lazy to draw and don’t know how to draw." For Q5 ("When playing this system, I always know what to do next"), the child said, "Sometimes I might forget." 

Observation and feedback of the children during the co-creative sessions revealed the challenges and barriers they encountered TaleBot : A Tangible AI Companion to Support Children in Co-creative Storytelling for Resilience Cultivation 

Figure 6: Combined chart showing question averages and participant SUS scores. 

in interaction with TaleBot . These moments included instances when they realized that the story structures were not fully under their control. For example, 2 participants (C2, C12) expressed their desires for creating multi-protagonist narratives for their stories and wanted to draw multiple protagonists during the "character customization" procedure. Furthermore, children’s engagement in the co-storytelling process was occasionally disrupted when the AI-generated images were inconsistent with the narrative context or contained visual errors. (C1, C2, C4, C7, C12). For example, in the story of C1: After the teacher handed out the test papers, the bunny found that there were several questions it couldn’t answer at all. Its little paws began to tremble, and its ears drooped down. C1 noticed that the drooping ears were not depicted in the generated image.C4 noticed that the protagonist of the story sometimes wore glasses but sometimes did not. In addition, the children’s comprehension of the narratives could be hindered by misinterpretation of the social or emotional cues as illustrated in the stories. For instance, C4 was presented with a story scene where the protagonist came to the mental health teacher for help after being wronged in art class: The teacher gently wiped away the protagonist’s tears and said, “Would you like to talk about this with the art teacher?” The protagonist nodded and clenched her little hands into fists. Upon viewing the act of clenching the fist, C4 immediately said: “Is he going to fight with the teacher?”. The child misreads the clenched fists as a signal of anger and physical aggression rather than emotional distress. 

5.1.3 Children’s self-disclosure of personal feelings and coping strate-gies. During the co-creative sessions, we observed that the children sometimes projected their real-life experiences onto the main char-acters and revealed feelings, thoughts, and coping strategies as if they were in the same situations. 

Emotional engagement with the characters. From the study, we observed that some children became emotionally engaged with the main characters’ experiences, either by empathizing with them or by disagreeing with their behavior. When reflecting on the story scene where the protagonist forgot to finish her homework and was called to the teacher’s office, C6 talked to the teacher: “Actually, I don’t dare to say it either, I’m just like this myself.” Similarly, C9 expressed that: “I was like this when I was little,” when viewing the story scene where the protagonist was afraid of joining the play with other classmates because she was too shy. Some children associated the characters with their observation of other people around them in real life. C1 thought of her deskmate when reflecting on the story scene where the protagonist (a bunny) found that there were several questions she couldn’t solve in the final exam: “If it were my deskmate, he would secretly look for the answer.” However, some children disagreed with the character’s behavior in the stories. For example, when viewing the story scene where the protagonist got angry and slammed the table after seeing that two good friends were having fun without involving him, C3 remarked: “I wouldn’t slam the table.” 

Disclosure of coping strategies. In response to TaleBot ’s prompt-ing questions like "What would you do if you were the protagonist?" at story milestones, children demonstrated diverse coping strategies. We analyzed the total of 48 responses from the 12 child participants to the prompting questions of TaleBot at the story milestones (prior to the generation of each chapter of the stories), by referring to a Trovato et al. 

categorization framework for children’s cognitive and behavioral coping strategies provided by [ 22 ]. As a result, we categorized the children’s responses into a total of 10 coping strategies of five types: 

Problem Focused Coping (Cognitive Decision Making , Direct Prob-lem Solving , Seeking Understanding ), Positive Cognitive Reframing 

(Positive Thinking , Optimistic Thinking , Control ), Distraction Strate-gies (Physical Release of Emotions , Distracting Actions ), Avoidance Strategies (Avoidant Actions , Repression , Wishful Thinking ), Support Seeking Strategies (Support for Feelings , Support for Actions ). In summary, Direct Problem Solving was the most frequently applied strategy, utilized by every child in the study in response to the prompting questions. For example, in face of the situation of 

"Pink [the protagonist] was very upset that the teacher criticized her for not handing in her homework. What would the protagonist do?" ,C6 replied: ""Apologize to the teacher and submit the homework." 

The least common strategies were Distracting Actions , Repression ,and Support for Feelings , with each being applied just once by a different child. It is also noteworthy that the strategies of Control ,

Wishful Thinking , and Support for Actions were not indicated by the children, and thus not included in the categorization. Appendix D shows further details of the children’s coping behaviors exhibited through their responses in the interactions. 

5.1.4 Teachers’ strategies and perspectives. Through video obser-vation of the interaction sessions and reflective interviews with the teacher, we identified how the teacher guided the children in interaction with TaleBot and her perspective on integrating it into counseling practices for children experiencing everyday adversities. These insights further highlight the potential of TaleBot to facili-tate child-teacher communication within the context of elementary school counseling. 

Guidance strategies. During the interaction session, teachers employed various strategies to guide the children in the co-creation of stories and the self-expression of feelings, thoughts, and coping strategies in relevant story contexts. For example, at the beginning of the sessions, the teacher engaged with the children in small talks, such as "Have you been having a good time at school recently?" and "How’s it been with mom and dad recently?". During the interaction, the teacher prompted the children to engage with TaleBot through encouraging and complimentary com-ments. For example, upon seeing the generated character from C3’s drawing, the teacher said: “The character you created is very cute.” When C2 discovered an incorrect text in the generated image, the teacher responded: “That’s amazing! How did you figure out the problem so quickly? You’re such an error correction expert!” When C3 did not know how to reply to TaleBot and got stuck in the process, the teacher calmed him by saying: “Let’s try it first... You can say whatever comes to your mind. It’s okay, we can add more later.” Meanwhile, the teacher encouraged the children to express their feelings and thoughts in similar situations by relating their real-life experiences to the story contexts. For example, when C2 was involved in the story scene, that character was criticized by the teacher for not paying attention in class. The teacher asked: “Which teacher in your class do you think is most similar to this teacher?” 

Similar techniques were used when the children felt lost in the process or uncertain of which answer to give, in which cases the teacher prompted them with questions, e.g., “If you experienced something unhappy or unpleasant at home, what would you do?” and 

“If it were you, how do you think you would feel at this moment?” 

Feedback on use of TaleBot in school counseling. Overall, the teacher provided positive feedback about integrating TaleBot 

in the counseling practice, which encouraged the children’s self-expression in playful, personalized scenarios and facilitated conver-sations on topics that are otherwise difficult to address. In particular, the teacher appreciated the comfortable atmosphere that made it easier to engage children in emotionally sensitive topics: “Face-to-face psychological counseling in schools tends to be rather dry and directive for children. Children often feel that teachers are preaching or offering platitudes... However, if combined with this method, with just slight guidance, children’s acceptance of psychological counseling would be much higher.” Similar comments were made by her when reflecting on the session with C6: “when I heard the child say ’I don’t dare to say it either’ ... she had already projected herself in the situation... If I simply brought her for an interview today without this tool present, she might not reveal her inner state, or it might take several sessions to build familiarity and establish rapport.” 

She compared TaleBot with traditional storytelling methods in mental health counseling: "Although storytelling and story books can be incorporated, they do not match AI’s speed and efficiency in creating frameworks or identifying suitable books for children." She highlighted TaleBot’s superiority over sand-play therapy, noting its enhanced guidance capabilities. "Unlike sand-play, which is used less frequently in schools due to lack of structured guidance and difficulty linking to real-life situations, TaleBot offers structured, interactive storytelling that easily connects with real-world contexts. It facili-tates meaningful engagement, helping children apply scenarios and problem-solving strategies to their everyday lives." 

The teacher envisioned how TaleBot might serve as a tool to facilitate her communication with the parents regarding the emo-tional challenges experienced by their children. She has observed that the parents tended to avoid such topics and sometimes even showed distrust of the teacher’s assessment by saying “What gives you the right to say this about my child?” Therefore, children’s co-creation with the system and their responses during the process might serve as objective evidence to assist their communication with the parents. 

## 5.2 Parents’ Attitudes and Perspectives ( RQ2 )

5.2.1 Co-created Storybooks Facilitating Child-parent communi-cation. From the interview with the parents, we noticed that the Child-AI co-created storybooks served as a tool facilitating positive child-parent conversations on relevant topics. P10 described how C10 shared the storybook with her at home: “After finishing, he eagerly showed this to me, including his exam results and other things he wanted to tell us about, and he could simply retell the story in the story book himself.” She appreciated it that our system design pro-vided an appropriate method to initiate child-parent conversations within the family, noting that: “It is very good for building relation-ships between children and parents,” and that it helped her to gain an 

“understanding of the children’s inner thoughts without direct explicit exposure to adults.” P1 said that the storybook provided a lens into their children’s life outside home: “[through this storybook,] I can understand how children make decisions when they’re not with us.” TaleBot : A Tangible AI Companion to Support Children in Co-creative Storytelling for Resilience Cultivation 

When asked how she communicated with the children during the story sharing, P1 replied: “I tell him his thinking is great, like ’you’re just like this protagonist’. I give him feedback in an encouraging way.” 

P12 appreciated that this activity created an opportunity for the child to form and share his own thoughts, though he noted that he did not have time to read the storybook together with C12, saying: 

“He [C12] came back and retold what he did with the story book and what he had learned from it. I feel that the fact he was able to under-stand these things and give a simple summary himself is already a kind of progress.” 

5.2.2 Reflection on Parental Approaches in Family Communica-tion. Upon viewing the annotated storybooks, most parents were inspired with new perspectives towards their own parental ap-proaches in family communication with their own children. 

Realization of Over-controlling Parental Style. For example, after reviewing the story co-created by C1 where the protagonist was struggling with a challenging exam, P1 responded: “I can tell that his responses follow the method I usually taught him, which shows he can remember.” However, P1 acknowledged that their directive parental approach might lead to the child’s lack of confidence and tendency to escape, as pointed out by the teacher in the storybook commentary. In particular, P1 was triggered by C1’s responses of 

“Skip to the next one” and “Just forget about it” in the situation where the protagonist felt anxious about the difficult questions in the exams. P1 agreed with the teacher’s commentary that “choosing to forget is a way for children to protect themselves, but it may also indicate that they haven’t yet found better ways to cope.” Reflecting on this, he noted: “He [C1] indeed has those issues, such as wanting to escape when encountering difficulties. I think it’s quite accurate.” 

Furthermore, P1 realized the need to adjust their parental style: “If we hadn’t been over-controlling, he wouldn’t have incorporated what we said and taught him into his stories. In practice, this might lead to rebellious psychology - teaching too much makes him not want to do it.” 

Balancing Love and Praise in Sibling Relationships. P10, the mother of C10 and C11 (twin sisters), described that the anno-tated storybooks highlighted the personality difference between her daughters: the older one (C10) was more extroverted and competi-tive, while the younger one (C11) was shy and easily intimidated when compared to others. Reflecting on the stories of C10 (the protagonist was worried that she was worse than everyone else at everything) and C11 (the protagonist was afraid of joining their classmates’ game due to the fear of being rejected), P10 noticed that the stories captured the peer pressure their daughters experienced in relation to each other, especially the younger one. P10 agreed with the AI interpretation of C10’s story: “the child tends to asso-ciate ’being praised = being loved’ and ’being criticized = I’m not good enough.’ Therefore, whenever she hears comments from classmates or teachers, she becomes anxious and feels an urgent need to prove themselves.” P10 added, “We might have had this feeling before, and a few words completely captured our feelings... we will pay more attention to emphasizing to the child that love is love, and doing well is doing well - these are two different things.” 

5.2.3 Attitudes towards Resilience Education. The parents expressed varied perspectives on resilience education in the family context. 

Gap between Theory and Practice. While most parents ac-knowledged the significance of cultivating children’s resilience, some found it difficult to apply it in everyday communication with the children. For example, P1 wondered how she could use prin-ciples of psychological resilience in her communication with her child (C1): “Now that it’s summer vacation, he still isn’t very willing to do his homework. Every day, he either watches TV or plays on his phone. I don’t really dare to push him to do his homework because I’m afraid he’ll resent it. So, I’m wondering how I should remind him. Or just let him do whatever he wants for now and not mention it?” 

Similarly, P4 pointed out the gap between theory and practice: “He is not yet able to express himself fully. Normally, I have to ask him [to know his thoughts]... He is still quite timid. When I compare him to other children, I sometimes feel a bit anxious and may scold him a little. In theory, I know how I should help him face [challenges in] life, but in practice, my actions don’t always fully align with that.” 

Learn by Experiencing. While P10 also acknowledged the importance of cultivating resilience in children to prepare them for a competitive society, he was calm about taking immediate action in this regard. He emphasized that learning resilience does not have to come from textbooks or parents, but is part of their own lives as they grow up: “Our suggestions might not be very useful, including suggestions from books... To be honest, like what’s mentioned in the storybook about interacting with friends, these things can only be balanced by themselves. We give them some suggestions, but ultimately they have to find their own way of getting along with society and friends.” Similarly, P4 realized the limit of parents in assisting the child in dealing with challenges: “The teacher said that the child may still need more courage to face challenges in life on their own. Perhaps we have been doing too much for them.” 

"It is not psychological, it is behavioral." Some parents ex-pressed avoidant attitudes toward “psychosocial issues” and were reluctant to associate this term with their children’s situations. Both P4 and P12 expressed their concerns when they first heard about the study, worrying that their children were treated as a special case due to psychological problems: “When the teacher mentioned this to me, I wondered whether my child had a serious problem... Why was he asked to participate instead of other children?” (P4) P8 shared that she had learned about resilience but tended to view this as a behavioral rather than psychological issue: “I don’t see it as a psychological problem, I just treat it as a matter of behavioral habits.” 

When such an issue occurred, P8 tended to address it by reasoning with the child to help her distinguish right from wrong. 

5.2.4 Attitudes and visions about AI-powered Systems to Support Children’s Resilience and Mental Wellbeing. We observed different attitudes of the parents towards AI-powered Systems for supporting children’s mental wellbeing as they envisioned the use of TaleBot 

in both school and family contexts. 

Envisioning TaleBot as a Tool to Support Family Commu-nication. Some parents (P4, P10, P12) recognized the potential of using TaleBot as a tool to facilitate child-parent communication. P4 envisioned a scenario where TaleBot could help her settle the family conflict about getting up on time: “If I use it, I would set up how to make children get up on time in the morning and actively complete homework, so we don’t cause much pain in parent-child relationships.” Similarly, both P10 and P12 imagined how TaleBot Trovato et al. 

could help them integrate their family situations as the storylines in the co-creative activities between parents and children. 

A Remote Mental Health Monitoring System. Some parents were positive about such AI-based systems to understand their children’s situations and track their growth over time. For example, P1 said: “AI is a new thing to try, and it’s also a good opportunity to understand the child’s condition.” When asked about new features he would like to add to the TaleBot system, P1 suggested a function for longer-term tracking of the child’s progress: “I want to know if he will have some changes after a period of time, or if there are any differences in how he views the same thing. For example, twice per semester or once per semester, so the child won’t forget the psy-chological problems encountered by the protagonist he designed last time.” Similarly, P12 imagined an AI-powered system that provided a longer-term track of the children’s physiological status and their progress in dealing with challenging situations: “Is there a follow-up to track the student’s psychological state and provide timely feedback to parents, so they can understand whether the student’s behavior has improved as a result of the interventions? I think this would serve as a very useful form of supervision for parents.” 

Lack of Human Touch. Some participants were more doubtful about using AI for resilience cultivation or, more broadly, mental health interventions, given the lack of human touch in AI. For ex-ample, P4 expressed that: “To some extent, AI is very convenient, but I would tell children that AI cannot match human capabilities because having a heart is what’s most important for humans.” P12 shared a similar opinion: “AI is a programmed system. Actually, psychological teachers’ responses would have more public trust. Teachers can judge students’ current psychological state through their words and behav-iors, but AI cannot see this. AI cannot replace humans in emotional matters.” When comparing the two types of commentaries, P10 showed his preference for the teacher’s over AI’s advice: “I prefer a human psychologist. Of course, I think AI analysis is quite good, but advice from a person gives a sense of security and seems more professional.” 

## 6 Discussion 

Findings from this study showed that the system could facilitate self-expression of personal feelings and thoughts about personally relevant adversarial scenarios, promote child-teacher communica-tion over these topics, and evoke parents’ reflection on parental ap-proaches in family communication. In this section, we further sum-marize these insights into design applications for AI-empowered storytelling systems that support children’s resilience cultivation in the context of school-based mental health counseling and family communication. 

## 6.1 Facilitating Children’s Emotion Expression and Sharing in Psychological Settings 

Our findings in Section 5.1 revealed that TaleBot could facilitate children’s emotional engagement with the protagonists in person-ally relevant situations, creating opportunities for the children to express their feelings, thoughts, and coping strategies in personally relevant situations. Teachers’ reflections on guiding co-creative sessions and parents’ reflections on the co-created stories, enriched by teacher and AI commentaries, revealed how the system could support children’s resilience in school counseling and family com-munication. Our work extends the applications of AI-empowered storytelling systems, which often focus on skill training and creative thinking (e.g., StoryPrompt [ 28 ], Stroymate [ 16 ], StoryBuddy [78 ]), to the do-main of mental health education and counseling. While relevant work can be found that utilizes AI to support children in learning social-emotional literacy (e.g., [ 65 , 80 ]), most of these studies ad-dress general knowledge acquisition and lack personal relevance to the children’s past or ongoing experiences. One exception is ChaCha [ 62 ], an LLM-driven chatbot that engages the child users to share personal events and relevant emotions with it to enhance children’s emotion communication skills. As mentioned in [ 62 ], it is recommended that such systems should be used as temporary tools to "guide children to share their emotional needs with parents or professionals rather than replacing their roles as caregivers". Still, parents and professionals continue to face challenges in supporting children through psychologically difficult situations and fostering resilience in the process. In particular, one of the remaining chal-lenges is to encourage children to express their emotions and inner thoughts about their experiences, because of the children’s limited emotional literacy, potential psychological burdens of the topics, and required skills for the professionals and parents to properly guide the children in self-disclosure of their emotions [ 9, 17 , 63 , 64 ]. Our work addresses this gap by introducing an interactive system that allows children to react to and reflect on their personal experi-ences through an ‘illusory’ AI-generated layer, providing personally relevant, yet playful and psychologically distanced opportunities for self-disclosure and receiving support from others. 

## 6.2 Balancing Effective and Adaptive Coping Strategies 

In our study, we found that some children displayed an avoidant tendency in suggesting coping behavior for the protagonists or admitting to having experienced a similar situation (as shown in Table 3). For example, C10 responded, "Just forget about it", when the protagonist was anxious about the challenging questions in an exam. When asked by the teacher whether they had experienced similar situations as the protagonist, C1 said "No", despite the fact that the storyline was customized based on the teacher’s observa-tion of C1’s real-life experiences. Avoidant coping strategies, such as withdrawal, denial, or disengagement, are often recognized in children in the face of adversarial situations [ 2 , 33 , 35 ]. While such strategies can function as effective protective mechanism against immediate and uncontrollable stressors [ 2 , 5], they often lead to ad-verse psychological consequences over time, such as social anxiety and depression in later stage of life [59, 61]. Future AI-empowered HCI systems for resilience cultivation should help children develop adaptive coping strategies while still supporting their need to manage short-term, uncontrollable stres-sors. Our observations show that the current design of TaleBot 

tends to steer children toward long-term strategies, which may not always align with their existing coping tendencies. To address this, systems could provide gentle prompts that suggest alterna-tives without dismissing a child’s initial response. Such strategies should be implemented dynamically, taking into account both past TaleBot : A Tangible AI Companion to Support Children in Co-creative Storytelling for Resilience Cultivation 

experiences and real-time reactions of the children, gradually guid-ing children from familiar coping habits toward more beneficial long-term approaches. 

## 6.3 Developing Personal Meanings with and beyond the Support of Teachers and Parents 

Enabling children to develop their own perspectives is the key to promoting their subjective wellbeing in adversarial situations [ 53 ]. Research shows that the involvement of parents and profession-als (e.g., school counselors) is particularly important for fostering self-confidence and helping children construct personalized nar-ratives around challenging situations [ 12 , 55 ]. With TaleBot , we aim to cultivate the process through which the children can co-create narratives (with AI) in overcoming challenging situations that are personally relevant. This process allows children to de-velop personal narratives that reflect their self-understanding of these experiences, providing opportunities for school counseling and family communication. During the study, we have seen how the teacher and parents shared different opinions in supporting children to develop their own perspectives towards adversities. The teacher showed the in-terest and responsibility to guide the children to have their own understanding. However, it seemed difficult for them to engage chil-dren in emotionally sensitive discussions within the limited scope of short-term counseling. Thus, the teacher appreciated the system for it provided an emotional buffer to facilitate children to share emotional experiences, which would otherwise take a longer term of communication. For the parents, they appreciated the Child-AI co-created storybooks serving as a means to child-parent commu-nication as embedded in the natrual family contexts. However, they tended to see children’s psychological growth as a natural process without investing dedicated efforts. When asked about their visions for future design of AI-empowered systems, some parents envi-sioned a monitoring system for children’s mental status and their progress in developing coping skills (Section 5.1.4). Meanwhile, we recognized the children were easily influenced by the parental approach in family communication. Yet, untrained parents may unintentionally impose limiting or even harmful influences. For example, in some cultures, sharing personal hardships is sometimes perceived as a sign of failure or incapability [ 1], and such beliefs are often reinforced by senior family members. These reflections highlight the need for multi-faceted systems that connect key stakeholders, including teachers, psychological counselors, and parents, around a shared understanding of chil-dren’s needs and coordinated strategies to safeguard their wellbe-ing. 

## 6.4 Limitations and Future Work 

We acknowledge several limitations of this study. First, only one mental health teacher (who is one of the only two psychological counselors) was involved in the formal study due to the limited resources of the elementary school. This limits our speculation on the potential roles of mental health teachers and school coun-selors in supporting children’s interactions with the system and using it for follow-up guidance. Second, parents were indirectly involved in the study, reflecting on the outcomes of the interactions rather than participating in them directly. Child–parent communi-cation was initiated and facilitated through the co-created stories, which emerged from the Child–AI interactions without parental presence. This may have limited parents’ ability to fully under-stand their children’s feelings and thoughts, which were revealed through non-verbal behavior during the co-storytelling with AI. Third, in the annotated version of the story books (Appendix E), we included an "AI analysis" alongside the teacher’s commentaries, providing provocative points for parents to reflect on their chil-dren’s responses to imaginary yet personally relevant adversarial situations. These AI perspectives were not intended as professional psychological assessments, but rather as a reference to encourage parents to envision how AI might serve as a supplementary aid to human professional support. However, extra caution is warranted about the potential ethical risks caused by AI-based psychological interpretations, such as bias or misinterpretation because of lack of access to the person’s real life experiences and their social envi-ronments. Fourth, we consider our work as the first trial to explore the potential of an AI-powered interactive storytelling system for cultivating children’s resilience in the context of school counseling. However, no conclusions should be drawn on the system’s psy-chological effects to promote the children’s long-term resilience growth in school counseling or family communication, which goes beyond the scope of this study. Larger-scale and longer-term studies are needed to investigate the psychological impacts of implementa-tion of the system. Finally, Technical implementation of the system should be improved in future iterations regarding the visual quali-ties and system efficiency. During the study, some children were distracted by inconsistencies between their voice inputs and the generated visuals. Many also found the average generation time of 5 to 10 seconds too long, leading to impatience while waiting. 

## 7 Conclusion 

This study presents an empirical study of design deployment of a AI-empowered storytelling system, namely TaleBot , to support children’s resilience cultivation. The design of the system is in-formed by a formative study with mental health professionals and elemetary school teachers. TaleBot enables the children to co-create stories with a conversational AI based on story outline predefined by the school teacher (counselor) based on their understanding of the children’s current circumstances and psychological needs. Through a user study with 12 elementary children who interacted with TaleBot under the guidence of the teacher (counselor) in a school counseling room. The Child-AI co-created stories was then printed out and shared with the parents, with an annotated version communicated to the parents separately. Through observation of the co-creative sessions, post-session interviews with the teacher and interviews with the parents, we gain insights into: 1) how Tale-Bot can facilitate the children’s self-expression of feelings, thoughts and coping strategies in imaginary and personally relevant situa-tions, and create opportunities for child-teacher communication over the topics, and 2) how the co-created stories can facillatate parents’ reflection on their parental approaches and visions about the use of AI-empowered systems for support children’s mental wellbeing within and across family contexts. This study has demon-strated the potential of the AI storytelling system in the field of Trovato et al. 

children’s mental health and provides design implications for future related systems. 

## References 

[1] Ahmed A Ahad, Marcos Sanchez-Gonzalez, and Patricia Junquera. 2023. Un-derstanding and addressing mental health stigma across cultures for improving psychiatric care: A narrative review. Cureus 15, 5 (2023). [2] Jennifer L Altshuler and Diane N Ruble. 1989. Developmental changes in chil-dren’s awareness of strategies for coping with uncontrollable stress. Child development (1989), 1337–1349. [3] Gökmen Arslan and Paul Wong. 2024. Embracing life’s challenges: Developing a tool for assessing resilient mindset in second wave positive Psychology. Journal of Happiness and Health 4, 1 (2024), 1–10. [4] Aaron Bangor, Philip T Kortum, and James T Miller. 2008. An empirical evaluation of the system usability scale. Intl. Journal of Human–Computer Interaction 24, 6 (2008), 574–594. [5] Jane Bernzweig, Nancy Eisenberg, and Richard A Fabes. 1993. Children’ s coping in self-and other-relevant contexts. Journal of experimental child psychology 55, 2 (1993), 208–226. [6] Madhumita Bhattachaya. 2013. Building resilience through real-life scenario-based technology enhanced learning environment design. In 2013 IEEE Region 10 Humanitarian Technology Conference . IEEE, 212–214. [7] Robert Bowman, Camille Nadal, Kellie Morrissey, Anja Thieme, and Gavin Do-herty. 2023. Using Thematic Analysis in Healthcare HCI at CHI: A Scoping Review. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Hamburg, Germany) (CHI ’23) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 491, 18 pages. doi:10.1145/3544548.3581203 [8] Nathalie Bressa, Kendra Wannamaker, Henrik Korsgaard, Wesley Willett, and Jo Vermeulen. 2019. Sketching and Ideation Activities for Situated Visualization Design. In Proceedings of the 2019 on Designing Interactive Systems Conference 

(San Diego, CA, USA) (DIS ’19) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 173–185. doi:10.1145/3322276.3322326 [9] WHAT WORKS BRIEFS. [n. d.]. Fostering Emotional Literacy in Young Children: Labeling Emotions. ([n. d.]). [10] Ceri Brown and Marnee Shay. 2021. From resilience to wellbeing: Identity-building as an alternative framework for schools’ role in promoting children’s mental health. Review of Education 9, 2 (2021), 599–634. [11] Christopher Bryan, Deirdre O’Shea, and Tadhg MacIntyre. 2019. Stressing the relevance of resilience: A systematic review of resilience across the domains of sport and work. International Review of Sport and Exercise Psychology 12, 1 (2019), 70–111. [12] Nadia Butler, Zara Quigg, Rebecca Bates, Lisa Jones, Emma Ashworth, Steve Gowland, and Margaret Jones. 2022. The contributing role of family, school, and peer supportive relationships in protecting the mental wellbeing of children and adolescents. School Mental Health 14, 3 (2022), 776–788. [13] Helen Cahill, Sally Beadle, Anne Farrelly, Ruth Forster, and Kylie Smith. 2014. Building resilience in children and young people. Youth Research Centre, Mel-bourne Graduate School of Education, University of Malbourn (2014), 16–21. [14] Jinghe Cai, Xiaohan Li, Bohan Chen, Zhigang Wang, and Jia Jia. 2023. CatHill: emotion-based interactive storytelling game as a digital mental health inter-vention. In Extended Abstracts of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1–7. [15] Richard F Catalano, M Lisa Berglund, Jean AM Ryan, Heather S Lonczak, and J David Hawkins. 2004. Positive youth development in the United States: Research findings on evaluations of positive youth development programs. The annals of the American academy of political and social science 591, 1 (2004), 98–124. [16] Jiaju Chen, Minglong Tang, Yuxuan Lu, Bingsheng Yao, Elissa Fan, Xiaojuan Ma, Ying Xu, Dakuo Wang, Yuling Sun, and Liang He. 2025. Characterizing LLM-Empowered Personalized Story Reading and Interaction for Children: Insights From Multi-Stakeholder Perspectives. In Proceedings of the 2025 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1–24. [17] Hadis Cheraghian, Khadije Moradian, and Tahere Nouri. 2023. Structural model of resilience based on parental support: the mediating role of hope and active coping. BMC psychiatry 23, 1 (2023), 260. [18] Jenna H Chin, Seungwook Lee, Mohsena Ashraf, Matt Zago, Yun Xie, Elizabeth A Wolfgram, Tom Yeh, and Pilyoung Kim. 2024. Young Children’s Creative Sto-rytelling with ChatGPT vs. Parent: Comparing Interactive Styles. In Extended Abstracts of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Hon-olulu, HI, USA) (CHI EA ’24) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 379, 7 pages. [19] Steven J Condly. 2006. Resilience in children: A review of literature with impli-cations for education. Urban education 41, 3 (2006), 211–236. [20] Carry Cooper, Jill Flint-Taylor, and Michael Pearn. 2013. Building resilience for success: A resource for managers and organizations . Springer. [21] James P Coyle. 2011. Resilient families help make resilient children. Journal of Family Strengths 11, 1 (2011), 5. [22] Gerly M De Boo and Jelte M Wicherts. 2009. Assessing cognitive and behavioral coping strategies in children. Cognitive therapy and research 33, 1 (2009), 1–20. [23] Nadia De Vecchi, Amanda Kenny, Virginia Dickson-Swift, and Susan Kidd. 2016. How digital storytelling is used in mental health: A scoping review. International Journal of Mental Health Nursing 25, 3 (2016), 183–193. [24] Joyce Divinyi. 1995. Storytelling: An enjoyable and effective therapeutic tool. 

Contemporary family therapy 17, 1 (1995), 27–37. [25] Beth Doll and Mark A Lyon. 1998. Risk and resilience: Implications for the delivery of educational and mental health services in schools. School psychology review 27, 3 (1998), 348–363. [26] Julia Dray and Diane Symons. 2024. Review of Innovative Mental Health Sup-port for Children and Young People: Generative AI Co-design Applications and Challenges. Current Developmental Disorders Reports 12, 1 (2024), 13. [27] Howard Dubowitz, Richard Thompson, Laura Proctor, Richard Metzger, Mau-reen M Black, Diana English, Gina Poole, and Lawrence Magder. 2016. Adversity, maltreatment, and resilience in young children. Academic pediatrics 16, 3 (2016), 233–239. [28] Min Fan, Xinyue Cui, Jing Hao, Renxuan Ye, Wanqing Ma, Xin Tong, and Meng Li. 2024. StoryPrompt: Exploring the design space of an AI-empowered creative storytelling system for elementary children. In Extended Abstracts of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1–8. [29] Min Fan, Xinyue Cui, Wanqing Ma, Haiyan Li, Xin Tong, Lin Yang, and Yonghui Wang. 2025. From Words to Wonder: Designing and Evaluating an AI-Empowered Creative Storytelling System for Elementary Children. In Proceedings of the 2025 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’25) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 328, 15 pages. [30] Amanda Fenwick-Smith, Emma E Dahlberg, and Sandra C Thompson. 2018. Sys-tematic review of resilience-enhancing, universal, primary school-based mental health promotion programs. BMC psychology 6, 1 (2018), 30. [31] David Fletcher and Mustafa Sarkar. 2013. Psychological Resilience: A Review And Critique Of Definitions. Concepts, And Theory, 18 (1), 12–23. [32] Rebecca Graber. 2022. Psychological resilience: State of knowledge and future research agendas . ODI. [33] Nicola Grossheinrich, Julia Schaeffer, Christine Firk, Thomas Eggermann, Lynn Huestegge, and Kerstin Konrad. 2022. Childhood adversity and approach/avoidance-related behaviour in boys. Journal of Neural Transmis-sion 129, 4 (2022), 421–429. [34] Thomas G Gunning. 2000. Creating literacy instruction for all children . ERIC. [35] Melissa J Hagan, Nicole Bush, Wendy Berry Mendes, Justine Arenander, Elissa Epel, and Eli Puterman. 2017. Associations between childhood adversity and daily suppression and avoidance in response to stress in adulthood: can neurobiological sensitivity help explain this relationship? Anxiety, Stress, & Coping 30, 2 (2017), 163–175. [36] Marte Hoff Hagen, Daniela Soares Cruzes, Letizia Jaccheri, and Jerry Alan Fails. 2023. Evaluating digital creativity support for children: A systematic literature review. International Journal of Child-Computer Interaction 38 (2023), 100603. [37] Brynjar Halldorsson, Claire Hill, Polly Waite, Kate Partridge, Daniel Freeman, and Cathy Creswell. 2021. Annual research review: immersive virtual reality and digital applied gaming interventions for the treatment of mental health problems in children and young people: the need for rigorous treatment development and clinical evaluation. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry 62, 5 (2021), 584–605. [38] Ria Hanewald. 2011. Reviewing the literature on" at-risk" and resilient children and young people. Australian Journal of Teacher Education (Online) 36, 2 (2011), 16–29. [39] Samuel MY Ho. 2025. The SHINE Framework: Fostering Resilience and Growth in the Face of Adversity. [40] Hsiu-Fang Hsieh and Sarah E Shannon. 2005. Three approaches to qualitative content analysis. Qualitative health research 15, 9 (2005), 1277–1288. [41] Zihui Hu, Hanchao Hou, and Shiguang Ni. 2024. Grow with Your AI Buddy: Designing an LLMs-based Conversational Agent for the Measurement and Cultivation of Children’s Mental Resilience. In Proceedings of the 23rd An-nual ACM Interaction Design and Children Conference (Delft, Netherlands) (IDC ’24) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 811–817. doi:10.1145/3628516.3659399 [42] Zihui Hu, Hanchao Hou, and Shiguang Ni. 2024. Grow with your AI buddy: designing an LLMs-based conversational agent for the measurement and culti-vation of children’s mental resilience. In Proceedings of the 23rd Annual ACM Interaction Design and Children Conference . 811–817. [43] Richta C IJntema, Yvonne D Burger, and Wilmar B Schaufeli. 2019. Reviewing the labyrinth of psychological resilience: Establishing criteria for resilience-building programs. Consulting Psychology Journal: Practice and Research 71, 4 (2019), 288. [44] Manasa Kalanadhabhatta, Adrelys Mateo Santana, Lynnea Mayorga, Tauhidur Rahman, Deepak Ganesan, and Adam Grabell. 2024. Multi-stakeholder Perspec-tives on Mental Health Screening Tools for Children. In Proceedings of the 2024 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Honolulu, HI, USA) 

(CHI ’24) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 693, 15 pages. doi:10.1145/3613904.3642604 TaleBot : A Tangible AI Companion to Support Children in Co-creative Storytelling for Resilience Cultivation 

[45] Jungeun Lee, Suwon Yoon, Kyoosik Lee, Eunae Jeong, Jae-Eun Cho, Wonjeong Park, Dongsun Yim, and Inseok Hwang. 2024. Open Sesame? Open Salami! Personalizing Vocabulary Assessment-Intervention for Children via Pervasive Profiling and Bespoke Storybook Generation. In Proceedings of the 2024 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Honolulu, HI, USA) (CHI ’24) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 120, 32 pages. doi:10.1145/3613904.3642580 [46] Stephen Z Levine, Avital Laufer, Einat Stein, Yaira Hamama-Raz, and Zahava Solomon. 2009. Examining the relationship between resilience and posttraumatic growth. Journal of traumatic stress: Official publication of the international society for traumatic stress studies 22, 4 (2009), 282–286. [47] Di Liu, Hanqing Zhou, and Pengcheng An. 2024. "When He Feels Cold, He Goes to the Seahorse"—Blending Generative AI into Multimaterial Storymaking for Family Expressive Arts Therapy. In Proceedings of the 2024 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Honolulu, HI, USA) (CHI ’24) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 118, 21 pages. doi:10. 1145/3613904.3642852 [48] Suniya S Luthar and Dante Cicchetti. 2000. The construct of resilience: Implica-tions for interventions and social policies. Development and psychopathology 12, 4 (2000), 857–885. [49] Barry Mallin, John R Walker, and Benjamin Levin. 2012. Mental health promotion in the schools: Supporting resilience in children and youth. In Resilience in children, adolescents, and adults: Translating research into practice . Springer, 91– 112. [50] Masab Mansoor, Ali Hamide, and Tyler Tran. 2025. Conversational AI in Pediatric Mental Health: A Narrative Review. Children 12, 3 (2025), 359. [51] Ann S. Masten and Andrew J. Barnes. 2018. Resilience in Children: Developmental Perspectives. Children 5, 7 (2018). doi:10.3390/children5070098 [52] Becky McCall, Laura Shallcross, Michael Wilson, Christopher Fuller, and Andrew Hayward. 2019. Storytelling as a research tool and intervention around public health perceptions and behaviour: a protocol for a systematic narrative review. 

BMJ open 9, 12 (2019), e030597. [53] Stina Michelson. 2024. Children’s narratives about well-being in the face of difficult life experiences: Renegotiated self-understandings as turning points. 

Qualitative Social Work 23, 2 (2024), 282–297. [54] Lisa A Newland. 2014. Supportive family contexts: Promoting child well-being and resilience. Early Child Development and Care 184, 9-10 (2014), 1336–1346. [55] Kristi L Perryman, Timothy TJ, and Hailey Thomas Frost. 2025. The School Counselors Role in Supporting Teachers Working with Children who Have Experienced Trauma: Lessons Learned. Journal of Child & Adolescent Trauma 

(2025), 1–14. [56] Nooshin Pordelan, Simin Hosseinian, Hamid Heydari, Sadaf Khalijian, and Mo-hammad Khorrami. 2023. Using digital storytelling in Rational Emotive Behavior Therapy: comparison of two online interventions. Behaviour & Information Technology 42, 9 (2023), 1410–1421. [57] Cynthia Putnam, Melisa Puthenmadom, Marjorie Ann Cuerdo, Wanshu Wang, and Nathaniel Paul. 2020. Adaptation of the system usability scale for user testing with children. In Extended abstracts of the 2020 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems . 1–7. [58] Chandra Ramamurthy, Peixin Zuo, Gregory Armstrong, and Karl Andriessen. 2024. The impact of storytelling on building resilience in children: A systematic review. Journal of psychiatric and mental health nursing 31, 4 (2024), 525–542. [59] Cele E Richardson, Natasha R Magson, Jasmine Fardouly, Ella L Oar, Miriam K Forbes, Carly J Johnco, and Ronald M Rapee. 2021. Longitudinal associations between coping strategies and psychopathology in pre-adolescence. Journal of Youth and Adolescence 50, 6 (2021), 1189–1204. [60] Elke A. Schoneveld, Monique Malmberg, Anna Lichtwarck-Aschoff, Geert P. Verheijen, Rutger C.M.E. Engels, and Isabela Granic. 2016. A neurofeedback video game (MindLight) to prevent anxiety in children: A randomized controlled trial. 

Computers in Human Behavior 63 (2016), 321–333. doi:10.1016/j.chb.2016.05.005 [61] Inge Seiffge-Krenke and Nicolai Klessinger. 2000. Long-term effects of avoidant coping on adolescents’ depressive symptoms. Journal of youth and adolescence 

29, 6 (2000), 617–630. [62] Woosuk Seo, Chanmo Yang, and Young-Ho Kim. 2024. Chacha: leveraging large language models to prompt children to share their emotions about personal events. In Proceedings of the 2024 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1–20. [63] Angela Serrano, Roberto Sanz, Juan Luis Cabanillas, and Elena Lopez-Lujan. 2023. Socio-emotional competencies required by school counsellors to manage disruptive behaviours in secondary schools. Children 10, 2 (2023), 231. [64] Linda Severinsen, Jan Reidar Stiegler, Helene Amundsen Nissen-Lie, Ben Shahar, and Rune Zahl-Olsen. 2022. Effectiveness of emotion focused skills training for parents: study protocol for a randomized controlled trial in specialist mental health care. BMC psychiatry 22, 1 (2022), 453. [65] Jocelyn J Shen, Jennifer King Chen, Leah Findlater, and Griffin Dietz Smith. 2025. eaSEL: Promoting Social-Emotional Learning and Parent-Child Interaction through AI-Mediated Content Consumption. In Proceedings of the 2025 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1–18. [66] Susan M Sheridan, Tara M Sjuts, and Michael J Coutts. 2012. Understanding and promoting the development of resilience in families. In Handbook of resilience in children . Springer, 143–160. [67] Yan Shi, Lidan Gong, Yiwen Lu, Lijuan Liu, Chao Zhang, Shujun Zhang, Longfei Wang, and Shan Zhou. 2025. "I Need Your Help!" : Facilitating Psychological Communication Between Left-Behind Children and Their Parents with an AI-Powered Sandbox. In Proceedings of the 2025 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’25) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 272, 19 pages. doi:10.1145/3706598.3713660 [68] Hao Fong Sit, Wen Chen, Dan Wu, Yangmu Huang, Dong Roman Xu, and Brian J Hall. 2024. Digital mental health: a potential opportunity to improve health equity in China. The Lancet Public Health 9, 12 (2024), e1136–e1141. [69] Petr Slovák, Nikki Theofanopoulou, Alessia Cecchet, Peter Cottrell, Ferran Al-tarriba Bertran, Ella Dagan, Julian Childs, and Katherine Isbister. 2018. " I just let him cry... Designing Socio-Technical Interventions in Families to Prevent Mental Health Disorders. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 2, CSCW (2018), 1–34. [70] Steven M Southwick, Robert H Pietrzak, and Gerald White. 2011. Interventions to enhance resilience and resilience-related constructs in adults. Resilience and mental health: Challenges across the lifespan (2011), 289–306. [71] Yilin Tang, Liuqing Chen, Ziyu Chen, Wenkai Chen, Yu Cai, Yao Du, Fan Yang, and Lingyun Sun. 2024. EmoEden: Applying Generative Artificial Intelligence to Emotional Learning for Children with High-Function Autism. In Proceedings of the 2024 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Honolulu, HI, USA) (CHI ’24) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 1001, 20 pages. doi:10.1145/3613904.3642899 [72] Richard G Tedeschi and Lawrence G Calhoun. 1996. The Posttraumatic Growth Inventory: Measuring the positive legacy of trauma. Journal of traumatic stress 

9, 3 (1996), 455–471. [73] Jennifer A Theiss. 2018. Family communication and resilience. Journal of applied communication research 46, 1 (2018), 10–13. [74] Zizhen Wang, Jiangyu Pan, Duola Jin, Jingao Zhang, Jiacheng Cao, Chao Zhang, Zejian Li, Preben Hansen, Yijun Zhao, Shouqian Sun, and Xianyue Qiao. 2025. CharacterCritique: Supporting Children’s Development of Critical Thinking through Multi-Agent Interaction in Story Reading. In Proceedings of the 2025 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’25) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 131, 21 pages. doi:10.1145/ 3706598.3713602 [75] Vajisha Udayangi Wanniarachchi, Chris Greenhalgh, Adrien Choi, and James R Warren. 2025. Personalization variables in digital mental health interventions for depression and anxiety in adolescents and youth: a scoping review. Frontiers in Digital Health 7 (2025), 1500220. [76] Fiona Yu, Deborah Raphael, Lisa Mackay, Melody Smith, and Anna King. 2019. Personal and work-related factors associated with nurse resilience: A systematic review. International journal of nursing studies 93 (2019), 129–140. [77] Chao Zhang, Cheng Yao, Jiayi Wu, Weijia Lin, Lijuan Liu, Ge Yan, and Fangtian Ying. 2022. StoryDrawer: a child–AI collaborative drawing system to support children’s creative visual storytelling. In Proceedings of the 2022 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems . 1–15. [78] Zheng Zhang, Ying Xu, Yanhao Wang, Bingsheng Yao, Daniel Ritchie, Tong-shuang Wu, Mo Yu, Dakuo Wang, and Toby Jia-Jun Li. 2022. StoryBuddy: A Human-AI Collaborative Chatbot for Parent-Child Interactive Storytelling with Flexible Parental Involvement. In Proceedings of the 2022 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (New Orleans, LA, USA) (CHI ’22) . Asso-ciation for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 218, 21 pages. doi:10.1145/3491102.3517479 [79] Zheng Zhang, Ying Xu, Yanhao Wang, Bingsheng Yao, Daniel Ritchie, Tong-shuang Wu, Mo Yu, Dakuo Wang, and Toby Jia-Jun Li. 2022. Storybuddy: A human-ai collaborative chatbot for parent-child interactive storytelling with flex-ible parental involvement. In Proceedings of the 2022 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1–21. [80] Hanqing Zhou, Anastasia Nikolova, and Pengcheng An. 2024. ’My lollipop dropped...’–Probing Design Opportunities for SEL Agents through Children’s Peer Co-Creation of Social-Emotional Stories. In Extended Abstracts of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1–8. [81] Staci M Zolkoski and Lyndal M Bullock. 2012. Resilience in children and youth: A review. Children and youth services review 34, 12 (2012), 2295–2303. 

## A APPENDIX: Prompt Templates 

This section presents the prompt templates for all seven agents as Figure 7, Figure 8, Figure 9, Figure 10, Figure 11, Figure 12 and Figure13. Trovato et al. 

Figure 7: Outline agent prompt template. 

Figure 8: Character agent prompt template. TaleBot : A Tangible AI Companion to Support Children in Co-creative Storytelling for Resilience Cultivation 

Figure 9: Question agent prompt template 

Figure 10: Writer agent prompt template. Trovato et al. 

Figure 11: Drawer agent prompt template. 

Figure 12: Reflection agent prompt template. TaleBot : A Tangible AI Companion to Support Children in Co-creative Storytelling for Resilience Cultivation 

Figure 13: Analysis agent prompt template. Trovato et al. 

## B APPENDIX: System Usability Scale for Children B.1 Question Items 

(1) If I had this app on my tablet, I think I would play it often. (2) This app is hard to play. (3) I think this app is easy to use. (4) I need an adult to help me when I continue playing this app. (5) When playing this app, I always know what to do next. (6) When playing this app, some things I have to do seem unreasonable. (7) I think most of my friends could learn to play this app quickly. (8) To play this app, I have to do some strange things. (9) I feel confident when playing this app. (10) I have to learn a lot before I can play this app well. (11) I really enjoy playing this app. (12) If I had more time, I would continue playing this app. (13) I plan to recommend this app to my friends. 

## B.2 Visual Representation of the Likert Scale of Agreement 

During the actual implementation, for participants with weaker expression or comprehension abilities, teachers would provide ver-bal explanations, and children would express their responses using gestures, as shown in Figure 14. 

Figure 14: Visual representation of the Likert scale. 

## C APPENDIX: Overview of Child-AI Co-created Stories 

Table 2 presents an overview of child-AI co-created stories and children’s coping strategies. 

## D APPENDIX: Distribution of Children’s Coping Strategies with Representative 

Table 3 presents the distribution of children’s coping strategies, categorized into five primary dimensions [ 22 ]. For each dimension, the table details the specific subscales, lists the associated response codes, and provides a representative example. These examples, featuring a prompt from the TaleBot and a child’s corresponding response, serve to illustrate how each strategy was manifested in the study. These responses are coded as "Cn-m", where "n" represents participant number (1–12) and "m" indicates the story chapter (1–4). TaleBot : A Tangible AI Companion to Support Children in Co-creative Storytelling for Resilience Cultivation 

Table 2: Overview of Child-AI Co-created Stories and Children’s Coping Strategies 

Story Title (Generated by AI) Child ID Children’s ongoing sit-uations and psycholog-ical needs (Teacher analysis) Settings (AI-teacher co-creation) Character & Name (Child-AI co-creation) Children’s responses at story milestone 

Exam Heart-beat Battle C1 Anxiety-prone with high academic pressure from parents Protagonist prepares for final exams but encoun-ters difficult questions Rabbit 

Bunny 

Deep breathing, skip difficult questions, forget worries, accept outcomes Classroom Secret C2 Emotional dysregulation, tends to shout when up-set Protagonist talks in class, feels teacher overreacts to minor disruption Girl 

Alice 

Focus on learning goals, accept teacher authority, balance atten-tion and play I Want to Play Hop-scotch Too C3 Mood swings, easily irri-tated, withdrawn behav-ior Protagonist wants to join games but struggles with peer inclusion Boy 

Yeer 

Make oneself visible, communi-cate needs clearly, apologize when necessary The Little Stone in My Heart C4 Diagnosed tic disorder Protagonist accidentally makes noise in class, feels misunderstood Boy 

Xiaoyu 

Explain intentions, self-soothe, seek counselor help, communicate with teachers Rainbow Tears in Pencil Case C5 School adaptation issues, emotional sensitivity Protagonist accidentally drops pencil case, feels criticized unfairly Boy 

Noting 

Continue focusing, apologize proactively, find calm through nature observation Homework Monster’s Honest Ad-venture C6 Diagnosed ADHD, emo-tional control difficulties Protagonist faces conse-quences for not complet-ing homework Girl 

Pink 

Admit mistakes, accept explana-tions, control anger, complete re-sponsibilities Warm Light in Little Fists C7 High parental expecta-tions across multiple ar-eas Protagonist faces criti-cism about handwriting and sports performance Boy 

Xiaoming 

Self-improvement focus, reflec-tion, remember past successes, continue efforts Soccer or Homework? C8 Severe behavioral issues, physical aggression Protagonist chooses play over homework, faces authority conflict Boy 

Ming 

Accept consequences, be honest about choices, prioritize responsi-bilities Happy In-vitation Hidden in Heart C9 Emotionally fragile, eas-ily upset by minor issues Protagonist desires friendship but fears rejection Girl 

Xiaomei 

Seek alternative friendships, accept invitations, share with friends My Star Prac-tice Book C10 Twin sister, good cooper-ation and expression Protagonist faces criti-cism about handwriting and drawing skills Kangaroo 

Xiaoai 

Practice improvement, seek addi-tional learning, set personal goals Bravely Jump into Happy Circle C11 Twin sister, emotionally fragile Protagonist wants friends but fears rejec-tion Girl 

Blue 

Ask to join, engage actively, main-tain friendships, communicate needs Queuing is Happier than Cutting C12 Rule violation, communi-cation difficulties Protagonist consistently breaks rules, causing peer rejection Boy 

Xiaohang 

Learn rule-following, remember consequences, apologize, main-tain good behavior Trovato et al. 

Table 3: Distribution of Children’s Coping Strategies with Representative Examples 

Dimension Subscale Response Code Example (TaleBot Question and Child’s Response) 

Problem Focused Coping Cognitive Decision Making C3-3, C8-4, C10-4 TaleBot: "After listening to his mom, what will Xiao Ai do?" 

C10-4: "Xiao Ai set a goal for himself. He wants to practice the things he doesn’t do well a few times." 

Direct Problem Solv-ing C1-2, C2-4, C3-1, C3-4, C4-1, C4-4, C5-1, C5-2, C6-1, C6-2, C6-3, C6-4, C7-1, C7-2, C8-1, C8-2, C8-3, C9-2, C9-3, C9-4, C10-1, C10-3, C11-1, C11-2, C11-4, C12-1, C12-3, C12-4 TaleBot: "Pink’s little fists are clenched tightly, and her little monster is jumping around. What will Pink do next?" 

C6-3: "Apologize to the teacher and submit the homework." 

Seeking Understand-ing C2-3, C3-2, C7-3, C10-2, C12-2 TaleBot: "Yeer sees his classmates having so much fun, but no one notices him. What would he think?" 

C3-2: "Yeer says why didn’t everyone notice me, why didn’t they see me." 

Positive Cognitive Reframing Positive Thinking C2-1, C2-2 TaleBot: "After being reminded by the teacher to listen carefully, what should Alice do?" 

C2-2: "From now on, Alice will never feel that class is boring." 

Optimistic Thinking C5-4, C7-4 TaleBot: "Noting feels very sad right now, what should he do?" 

C5-4: "The teacher will forgive him, and Noting will be happy again." 

Distraction Strategies Physical Release of Emotion C1-1, C1-4 TaleBot: "Bunny is studying hard for the final exam, but as the exam date approaches, it starts to feel nervous and anxious. What do you think Bunny will do next?" 

C1-1: "Take a deep breath." 

Distracting Actions C5-3 TaleBot: "Noting feels very sad right now, what should he do?" 

C5-3: "Look at the blue sky outside and calm down." 

Avoidance Strategies Avoidant Actions C4-2, C9-1, C11-3 TaleBot: "Xiaomei sees the other children playing happily and really wants to join in, but she’s a bit scared. What do you think Xiaomei will do next?" 

C9-1: "Xiaomei stopped playing with these children and went to play with her other good friend instead." 

Repression C1-3 TaleBot: "Bunny remembers what his mom said and decides to do the problems he knows first. However, he is still a little worried about the problems he doesn’t know. What will Bunny do next?" 

C1-3: "Forget about it." 

Support Seeking Strategies Support for Feelings C4-3 TaleBot: "Xiaoyu is standing by the window, the small stone in his heart getting heavier and heavier. What should he do?" 

C4-3: "Go and see the mental health teacher" TaleBot : A Tangible AI Companion to Support Children in Co-creative Storytelling for Resilience Cultivation 

## E APPENDIX: School Counselors and AI Commentary Report 

Figure 15 shows an example of the annotated story books, the school counselor’s and AI’s commentaries, and advice based on the children’s responses to the prompting questions. Trovato et al. 

Figure 15: Annotated story book for participant C1 (translated from Chinese).