Title: 2603.20479v1.pdf

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.20479v1

Published Time: Tue, 24 Mar 2026 00:15:52 GMT

Number of Pages: 22

Markdown Content:
> Language Learning & Technology 2026, Volume 30 Issue 2
> ISSN 1094 -3501 CC BY -NC -ND pp. #–#

# EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES 

# Profiling learners’ affective engagement: Emotion AI, 

# intercultural pragmatics, and language learning 

Robert Godwin -Jones, Virginia Commonwealth University 

# Abstract 

Learning another language can be a highly emotional process, typically characterized by numerous 

frustrations and triumphs, big and small. For most learners, language learning does not follow a linear, 

predictable path, its zigzag course shaped by motivati onal (or demotivating) variables such as personal 

characteristics, teacher/peer relationships, learning materials, and dreams of a future L2 (second 

language) self. While some aspects of language learning (reading, grammar) are relatively mechanical, 

other s can be stressful and unpredictable, especially conversing in the target language. That experience 

necessitates not only knowledge of structure and lexis, but also the ability to use the language in ways that 

are appropriate to the social and cultural con text. A new opportunity to practice conversational abilities 

has arrived through the availability of AI chatbots, with both advantages (responsive , non -judgmental ) and 

drawbacks (emotional ly void , cultura ll y bias ed ). This column explores aspects of emotion as they arise in 

technology use and in particular how automatic emotion recognition and simulated human responsiveness 

in AI systems interface with language learning and the development of pragmatic and interactional 

competence. Emotion AI —the algorithmically driven interpretation of users’ affective signal s—has been 

seen as enabling greater personalized learning, adapting to perceived learner cognitive and emotional 

states . Others warn of emotional manipulatio n and inappropriate and ineffective user profiling .

Keywords: Emotion AI, adaptive learning , intercultural competence , pragmatics 

Language(s) Learned in T his Study: All languages        

> APA Citation: Godwin -Jones, Robert (2026). Profiling learners’ affective engagement: Emotion AI,
> intercultural pragmatics, and second language learning .Language Learning & Technology ,XX (X), XX –
> XX . http s:// doi.org /10125/ XXXXX

# Introduction 

Given the close connection between the languages we speak and personal identity, it is no surprise that 

emotions play a significant role when we learn a new language ( Dewaele , 2015 ). The disorientation and 

vulnerability that come with exposure to different ways to view and describe the world around us can be 

deeply unsettling and anxiety -producing ( Dewaele , 2005 ). To learn a language, we need to practice using 

it while we still have an incomplete grasp of its fundamentals, a challenging proposition particul arly when 

it comes to speaking, an experience that involves the learner's “presentation of self and face ” (Dewaele ,

2005 , p. 376) . Yet emotions have not always been seen as an important area of research in applied linguistics 

(Dewaele , 2005 ). That has changed in recent decades, particularly as an initial sole focus on learner anxiety 

has expanded to an examination of positive and other emotions. Increased interest in emotions has led to 

new ways to conceive of cognition in relation to language learning, par ticularly through concepts of 

embodied cognition (Ellis , 2018 ), the idea that human mental processes are not just brain -based phenomena 

but are shaped by (and inseparable from) the body's physical interactions with the environment. From this 

perspective, thoughts, memory, and language are influenced by sensory perceptions, bod ily states, and 

physical interaction s with our immediate surroundings .

In addition to linking emotions to cognition, another direction in research on emotions in language learning 2 Language Learning & Technology 

has been to demonstrate the variability in emotional responses among learners, even in the same classroom, 

indeed within the same person at different times. That variability highlights the context -dependent, 

complex, and ecologically situated nature of the affective dimension of language learning . At the same 

time , individual variability aligns with the increasingly prevalent perspective in applied linguistics that sees 

learners as whole persons living and learning in a dynamically changing environment (Ben son, 2017; 

Larsen -Freeman , 2018) , affected by a great many variables, some internal (prior learning, motivation, etc. ), 

others external (teacher relationship, family /peer pressures, test anxiety, etc. ). That has led in recent years 

to greater interest in qualitative studies and narrative accounts that demonstrate the variable emotional 

reactions over time affected by changing learning contexts (Aragão , 2011; MacIntyre et al., 2019; Sampson, 

2024 ). Often a systems approach has proven to be most applicable in unraveling the complex set of factors 

at play (Kruk, 2022; Mercer 2011; Sampson, 2022 ). The variability also characterizes the need for teachers 

to provide individual guidance and to allow for (and e xpect) different reactions within a given cohort of 

learners or within the same person . That applies to in -person settings as well as online. 

Teacher guidance is of particular importance if generative AI is integrated into the learning environment. 

AI chatbots have been shown to be very useful for novice learners, especially those with little or no access 

to others with whom to practice the target language . A t the same time, concerns have been raised over the 

usefulness of AI systems to support the development of interactional and pragmatic abilities (Godwin -

Jones, 2025a; Kecskés & Dinh, 2025) . Chats with AI lack the dynamism and spontaneity of h uman -to -

human conversations and do not involve the same kind of negotiation of meaning experienced in the back 

and forth of real -world communication (Derakhshan & Taghizadeh , 2025 ; Dombi et al., 2025 ). While a

chatbot is endlessly patient, indefatigable, and non -judgmental, those very qualities —which are valuable 

for some aspects of language learning —do not allow for the deep personal engagement often felt in real 

world exchanges. Interactions in an L2 (second language) may become deeply emotional, dependin g on 

context, conversational characteristics /goals , and personal relationship s. While some studies have claimed 

that AI chat experiences can help develop emotional intelligence , others point out that AI can only simulate 

emotional engagement and therefore is ineffective —or even pernicious —to situations involving user 

emotion s ( McInerney & Keyes , 2025; Mohebbi, 2025). That concern touches not only language learning 

but also wider context s, as AI increasingly takes on roles as personal tutor, confidant, or therapist. 

In this column, we will be discussing the role of emotions in language learning with the main focus on 

technology use and in particular what Emotion AI —the automatic recognition of user emotional states —

may play in language learning. While some see the arrival of emotional AI as a boon to the development 

of individualized and personally responsive learning, others express concern s related to privacy, cultural 

bias, and emotional manipulation , with AI building profiles of users based on pseudo -scientific the ories of 

automatic facial and speech recognition ( Sadegh -Zadeh et al., 2026 ). The emotional core of language 

learning is pragmatics, the process of adjust ment to and align ment with social and cultural context s; with 

our interlocutor ’s thoughts, feelings, and intentions ; and with the ebb and flow of the conversation. That, 

too , is a topic that has proven to be controversial in terms of the extent of AI's usefulness (Dombi et al., 

2025; Tao et al., 2025) . Finally, the socially and culturally undifferentiated use by AI of its (Western 

oriented) training data —and automated proxy interpretations of human affective states —to formulate 

responses to pragmatic contexts tends to flatten and essentialize cultural characteristics. Privileging 

particular norms can serve to exclude alternative perspectives, disadvantaging minority voices , and 

potentially impeding the development of intercultural competence and understanding. 

# Emotions and Language Learning 

In considering the role of emotions in second language acquisition, it seems commonsensical that negative 

emotions such as anxiety, fear, or anger, would be detrimental to learning, while positive emotions like 

enjoyment, hope, or grit promote learning (Sa mpson, 2022). In fact, teachers regularly seek to promote 

positive emotions such as interest and enjoyment, while reducing anxiety (MacIntyre et al., 2019). Indeed, 

many studies point to positive emotions contributing to learner motivation (Aryadoust et al , 2024; Masgoret Robert Godwin -Jones 3

& Gardner, 2003) and the willingness to communicate (WTC; Elahi Shirvan et al., 2019). Likewise, anxiety, 

the emotion having been studied the longest in applied linguistics, has been shown to interfere with 

cognitive processing at all stages of the learnin g process (MacIntyre & Gregersen, 2012). 

On the other hand, studies have shown that negative emotions are not always detrimental to learning , as 

they may help recognize and overcome obstacles (Dewaele, 2015; Gregersen & MacIntyre, 2014). Swain 

(2013) cites examples in which learners’ anger or desire for revenge helped sustain a commitment to 

learning the target language: “They did not learn in spite of those negative emotions; they learned 

BECAUSE of them” (Swain, 2013, p. 198). Likewise, positive emotions may not be sustainable or lead to 

meaning ful engagement (Barcelos, 2015; Dewaele & MacIntyre, 2014). Language learning is typically a 

long -term process so that characteristics associated with positive psychology (grit, perseverance, hope, 

optimism) may play a more central role than in other acade mic subjects (Dewaele, 2021; McIntyre et al., 

2019). All learning may be infused with emotions (Immordino‐Yang & Damasio, 2016), but especially 

“something as bound up with the very essence of who we are as the learning of an additional language” 

(Sampson, 2024, p. 789). 

Studies have not only shown that emotions are complex in their effect on language learning, but they are 

also highly variable. One cannot assume that the same motivating activities, for example, will work across 

all learner populations for individual learn ers (McIntyre et al., 2019). Variations in emotional response have 

been shown not only with the same learner cohort but also within individual learners at different points in 

a class activity (Sampson, 2022; Pawlak et al., 2021). Dewaele and MacIntyre (201 4) point out that “the 

differences in situations that promote a positive or negative emotional reaction often are quite subtle, with 

the potential to go either way at any moment” (p. 265). The variability of learners’ emotional responses has 

been empirical ly demonstrated by research methods that offer a fine -grained profile across short interludes 

of time. That includes idiodynamic approaches (Sampson, 2022; MacIntyre & Legatto, 2011), latent profile 

analysis (Guo et al., 2025; Lei & Ye, 2025), and a small lens orientation (Sampson, 2024). 

Such studies emphasize discrete learner trajectories that may vary substantially from one another, even 

given the same teaching and learning environment. Individual differences come to the fore, touching on 

personal identity issues, which “live at the hear t of acquiring an additional language” (McIntyre et al., 2019, 

p. 262). Research has shown that the learner -internal variables combined with learner -external factors 

represent a “colorful canvas of emotion interwoven throughout all learners’ experiences in the classroom” 

(Sampson, 2022, p. 96 ; see also Solhi et al., 2026, this issue ). That vibrant interweave invites a consideration 

of the learner as a whole person buffeted by a variety of influences at different times and of the emotional 

ride of the learning process from the perspective of systems thinking (Sampson, 2022; Larsen -Fre eman, 

2019). Learning, understood as both embodied and social, connects emotions with physical, psychological, 

and relational contexts and environments. 

The variability in learner pathways to L2 learning affirms that a one -size -fits -all approach to instruction 

does not universally benefit learners. Computer -assisted language learning (CALL) has often been viewed 

as one solution to this problem . Early efforts targeted discrete areas of grammar and vocabulary through 

drill -and -practice exercises (Otto, 2017), later by way of language courseware (Godwin -Jones, 2017) but 

personalization was minimal in each case . Digital media and online services have brought better 

opportunities for individualized chosen pathways to informal learning throu gh entertainment outlets 

(streaming audio /video, online gaming ) or socialization (social media, affinity groups) . Studies have shown 

that informal learning offers substantial opportunities for implicit language learning as well as a rich source 

of enjoyment and motivation (Dressman et al., 2025; Kusyk et al., 2025; Sockett, 2014; Sundqvist & 

Sylv én, 2016) . A long -sought goal for CALL has been the development of adaptive, personalized 

instruction through intelligent language tutors (Meurers et al., 2019; Slavuj et al., 2015; Tafazoli et al., 

2019) . Generative AI systems now provide a seemingly ideal instrument for enabling that goal to become 

reality (Godwin -Jones, 2024 ; Holz et al., 2025 ; Elahi Shirvan et al., 2026, this issue ). AI -based tutors are 

designed to adapt to a learner’s abilities, actions, and pace, supplying just -in -time, scaffolded assistance as 

needed . They promise to offer p ersonaliz ed instruction , available anyplace and anywhere, in a non -4 Language Learning & Technology 

judgmental setting, with the added benefit of options such as gamification , multimedia integration, and/ or 

role -playing. 

AI tutors are seen by some as supplying not just assistance in cognitive development but also providing 

emotional guidance (Ikwuanusi et al., 2024; Tajik, 2025) . They can reduce learner anxiety, boost self -

confidence, and provide a sense of accomplishment. At the same time, AI tutoring systems aim to identify 

negative emotions such as stress or confusion and offer encouragement and suggestions for mood 

modification (“take a break”) and/or remediation (“try this alternative explanation”). Some argue, however, 

that the use of AI tutors as the principal instrument of instruction can have unintended adverse effects, such 

as diminish ing learner s’ capacity for independent learning and problem solving (Derakhshan & Taghizadeh ,

2025) . There is a risk that “ learners may become passive recipients of AI -generated solutions, which could 

weaken their ability to think critically and creatively ” (Derakhshan & Tagh izadeh , 2025, p. 2) . Possible 

other consequences include a reduction in teachers’ roles , as well as a loss of peer -mediated experiences ,

important in fo stering the development of interactional and sociolinguistic competence. Learner agency 

may be reduced to the role of completing a linearly oriented series of learning activities , rather than 

following personal interests or engaging in open -ended exploration .

Maintaining a learner ’s sense of agency is central to motivation and long -term language development 

(Dörnyei , 2009; Oxford, 2015) . The use of control -value theory ( Pekrun , 2006) in SLA research (second 

language acquisition) has demonstrated how the learner's sense of control, along with perceived task value, 

enable positive achievement emotions (Pawlak & Kruk , 2022 ; Pawlak et al., 2025 ). That can lead to higher 

levels of engagement and subsequent enhanced learning (C. Li, 2021, 2024; Shao et al., 2026, this issue) .

Studies of control -value theory in A I use have shown how learner control and perceived usefulness can 

extend to the use of AI systems in different dimensions of language learning (K. Li et al., 2026, this issue; 

Qi n & Derakhshan , 2026, this issue) . Other studies have cautioned that the intuitive interface , universal 

availability, and extreme usefulness of AI in helping to complete learning tasks can lead to over -reliance 

and a loss of agency (Lee, 2025; Yang & Lin, 2025) . The use of AI may lead to a reduction in emotional 

engagement ( Yanzhou, 2025). A study of young Korean learners of English compared emotional response 

and learner motivation in groups using AI tools for conversation practice to interacting with peer s. The 

results showed that “peer interactions provided rich opportunities for authentic communication and 

socioemotional connections, which AI tools could not replicate” (Lee, 2025, p. 15). If given a choice 

between AI conversation partners (producing less anxiety) or humans (enabling emotional connections) ,

cultural and individual differences can be the deciding factors . Studies have shown varying results 

depending on instructional and demographic contexts (see Tao et al., 2025; Timpe -Laughlin et al., 2024; 

Yang & Lin, 2025; Yanzhou, 2025) 

Learner agency in respect to control and emotional response needs to be viewed as a “complex, integrated 

system” (Sampson, 2022, p. 3), “emerging from the interaction between the learner as a physical, 

psychological being and multiple contextual systems” (Mercer, 2012, p. 43). Constructs tied to emotions 

such as motivation and engagement (and their opposites) represent an interplay of learner beliefs and past 

and ongoing life narratives (Sampson, 2022; Şimşek & Dörnyei, 2017). Beliefs have been shown to be 

central components of learner identities and how they are connected to emotions, to the extent that Barcelos 

(2015) suggests that “we can talk about emotions -beliefs -identities -in -practice to indicate how these have 

been formed over the years from interact ions in different settings and are continually being reconstructed 

through our past and present situated experiences” (p. 315 ; see Elahi Shirvan , 2026, this issue ). In practice 

this means not treating constructs like emotion or WTC in isolation, but rather as “emergent, dynamic, and 

interconnected” (Larsen -Freeman, 2019, p. 68; see De Bot et al., 2007). Individual differences need to be 

seen from this perspective, so that constructs like WTC are seen rising or falling “with a person doing the 

same task at d ifferent times” (MacIntyre, & Legatto, 2011, p. 168). 

Considering different time frames is at the core of the idiodynamic method and a fundamental component 

of complexity theory (Godwin -Jones, 2019 b; Larsen -Freeman, 2019). That metatheory insists on the 

variability of learner trajectories, as beginning dispositions are affected by different contextual variables Robert Godwin -Jones 5

over time. That dynamic process can result in a wide array of emotions, even to self -contradictory reactions 

(Mercer, 2011). In studies, group data may not be sufficient to detect the kind of variation within 

individuals, as “statistically calculated avera ges tend to disguise (or flatten) individualistic behavior and, as 

a result, they do not offer an in -depth understanding of the dynamics of the variables under investigation” 

(Kruk, 2022, p. 206). The variability among learners is likely best recognized us ing methods such as 

reflective journals, learner interviews, or other qualitative approaches. 

Learner reflective practices, along with teacher guidance, can be helpful in learners developing emotional 

intelligence, the ability to recognize, monitor, and manage emotions (Oxford, 2015), shown to reduce stress 

and anxiety and build self -confidence (Go leman, 2005). Knowing how to manage emotions “makes the 

learner less of a purely passive recipient and more of an agent in the emotion game” (Oxford, 2015, p. 386). 

This aligns with self -determination theory (Deci & Ryan, 1985; X. Wu et al., 2025 ; Solhi et al, 2026; this 

issue ) and the concept of the learner's ideal L2 self, as laid out in the L2 motivational self -systems 

framework (Dörnyei, 2009), frequently evoked in the studies of emotion and language learning ( G.L. Liu 

et al., 2025; Huang & Chan, 2024; Yu et al., 2022). Frequently cited as well is the PERMA framework 

(Seligman, 2011) and especially it's adaptation into language learning by Oxford (2016), known as 

EMPATHICS (Sampson, 2022; Wang & Hui, 2024). Both are based on the on concepts from positive 

psychology, as applied to learning (MacIntyre, 2019; Shao et al., 2020). Research points to the importance 

of teachers being mindful of the role of emotions and to engage students in motivational strategy reflection 

(Barcelos 2015; Huang & Chan, 2024; McI ntyre, 2019). 

# Emotions and Pragmatics 

Another fruitful area for reflection and discussion with learners is the role that social and cultural factors 

play in emotional responses to L2 interactions (Taguchi, 2019) . This brings pragmatics into the picture, the 

ability to use language in ways that are socially and culturally appropriate. Some aspects of learning an 

additional language are fairly mechanical, predictable, and straightforward —syntax, morphology, 

pronunc iation —and can be learned independent of substantial personal interactions in the t arget language. 

That is not true for pragmatics. There are no hard and fast rules for pragmatic language use and behavior. 

Appropriateness is determined by context and by the flow of the conversation and thus is learned gradually 

through interactions in th e L2. Cultural norms determine expectations but often allow for a wide range of 

possible pragmatic responses (Bardovi -Harlig, 2020; Godwin -Jones, 2025a). L2 speakers have as well the 

possibility of choosing to diverge from expectations or ignore them altog ether (Dewaele, 2005; 

McConachy, 2023a). The necessity to respond appropriately (verbally and nonverbally) on the fly to 

contexts which may involve, among other factors, personal distance, social hierarchy, gender roles, and 

subtle physical cues/clues is a daunting proposition in a language one is in the process of learning (Dewaele, 

2005; McConachy, 2023a). In contrast to working with verb conjugations or vocabulary flash cards, 

pragmatically relevant experiences can have significant emotional resonance, a s “learning the pragmatics 

of an additional language can present a challenge to learners’ sense of socially and morally desirable 

linguistic behavior within different roles, relationships and contexts, as well as their own sense of comfort 

as a language us er” (McConachy, 2023a, p. 175 -6). 

Surprisingly, the emotional dimension of learning pragmatics was until recently largely absent from 

research in L2 pragmatics, as the focus was primarily on speech acts (Dewaele, 2005). McConachy (2017, 

2023a) has been particularly persuasive in arguing fo r consideration of emotions in learning pragmatics. 

He argues that pragmatic decision making “is not a purely rational process but is rather an embodied process 

anchored in learners’ felt sense of right and wrong social behaviour and thus triggers complex evaluative 

processes with cognitive, emotional, and somatic dimensions.” (McConachy, 2023a, p. 176). This 

perspective aligns with the concept of embodied cognition and points to the importance of viewing learners 

as physical beings, for whom nonverbal resp onses can be as meaningful and revelatory as verbal language. 

Reactions to pragmatically related situations and potential responses stem from emotional experiences 

“triggered by the experience of difference” (McConachy, 2023a, p. 183), as the learner makes judgments 6 Language Learning & Technology 

based on moral codes developed over time. 

These individually developed “moral emotions” have been recognized as a crucial component of learning 

a second language, as shown in the research review in Amini et al. (2024). According to McConachy 

(2023b), “moral emotions are thought to help individuals internalize a sense of the community’s moral 

norms and standards and discern the moral status of behaviour accordingly (i.e. whether it is generally 

acceptable or not)” (p. 206). Additionally, the idea that an individual’s initial reaction in pragmatic co ntexts 

is oriented inwards, rooted in personal experiences of right and wrong and what is appropriate and what is 

not, aligns with concepts in sociocognitive pragmatics (Kecskes, 2019) . That theory emphasizes that both 

cooperation and egocentric behavior are manifested in all phases of communication to varying extents, 

placing equal importance on the social and cognitive factors in pragmatics. From this perspective, an 

individual’s init ial orientation to a pragmatic situation is tied to past personal experiences that, along with 

cultural influences, determine ones moral values, “Our reactions are conditioned by assumptions about 

social relationships and contextual behaviour that have bee n shaped by our cultural environment, social 

affiliations and life experiences” (McConachy, 2023b, p. 212). This is an insight that is applicable to 

interactions with those from our own culture as well as those from other cultures. 

McConachy (2023a) lays out a framework for helping learners develop metapragmatic awareness and a 

“mindfulness that allows for exploration of emotional reactions in a direct, non -judgmental way” 

(McConachy, 2023a, p. 188) with the goal of having learners g ain insight into the nature and origins of 

their own reactions in L2 pragmatic situations. He proposes using a set of pragmatic judgment tasks that 

present learners with an array of scenarios. The learner first “mindfully observes their own embodied 

reacti ons” (McConachy, 2023a, p. 192), to determine their initial feelings, then moves into an analysis of 

the scenario itself. Especially encouraged is for learners to “explore any feelings of discomfort or identity 

dissonance” (McConachy, 2023a, p. 194) that a rise in engaging in new communicative practices or 

exploring unfamiliar pragmatic features. This practice aligns with the benefits for intercultural learning of 

“critical incidents” (Spencer‐Oatey & Harsch , 2015) or “disorienting dilemmas” (Crane & Sosulsk i, 2021), 

situations where communication breaks down, resulting in misunderstanding s or conflict . Such experiences 

can be emotionally fraught but , through reflection, can have positive personal growth potential, disrupt ing 

and modify ing accepted views on cultural norms and behaviors (Godwin -Jones, 2019 a).

While McConachy’s (2023a) practice of pragmatic judgment tasks is similar in nature to the use of 

discourse completion tasks and role plays in pragmatic instruction, the emphasis on emotional response is 

innovative, and in that, it parallels the “reading for emotion” method outlined in Lian (2017). Usually in 

presenti ng L2 discourse completion tasks for pragmatics instruction, the emphasis is on learning to perform 

an expected norm, while the focus in the use of McConachy’s (2023a) framework is on more huma nistic 

goals such as self -awareness and intercultural understanding. That process can be instrumental in learners 

recognizing the dynamics of identity formation and the sources of their social reactions, feelings and values, 

leading to both more self -asses sment and enhanced understanding and empathy with those with differing 

orientations and values. Those developments can become articulated and entrenched through the use of 

practices such as reflective journals or peer feedback (see K. Li et al., 2026; this issue). 

# Emotion AI 

The fact that role plays are useful in learning pragmatics has recently led to interest in AI's potential as a 

pedagogical resource for developing pragmatic competence, given the ability of AI chatbots to take on a 

variety of roles. This is one of the uses of AI for language learning that have been highlighted in research 

(Myers, 2025; Stampfl et al., 2024). If, however, we accept the premise that “emotions should be at the 

center of research in pragmatics” (Wharton & De Saussure, 2023, p. 3), that raises t he question of whether 

a computer system is capable of playing roles that allow for the development of the emotional intelligence 

involved in learning appropriate pragmatic practices. Can AI systems help learners deal with “emotional 

speech acts” (Dewaele, 2005, p. 376) such as friendly banter or flirting? Dewaele (2005) cites those 

examples and asserts that classroom instruction and textbooks can only take learners so far in terms of Robert Godwin -Jones 7

pragmatics: “The last leg of the learners’ journey can only be unsupported. Authentic heated interactions 

with other users of the target language will provide ample opportunity to learn what could not be taught” 

(p. 377). Clearly, “authentic heated interac tions” are not something we can expect from AI chatbots. 

Some studies on AI and language learning assert that AI systems can play a constructive role in learner 

development of pragmatic competence in an L2. Tajik (2025), for instance, asserts that AI enhanced 

systems can “create personalized, emotionally intelli gent learning environments wherein learners can 

effectively articulate their thoughts while simultaneously regulating their emotional states” (p. 4). The study 

compares teacher -led environments that “frequently encounter difficulties in providing continuou s, 

customized emotional assistance” (Tajik, 2025, p. 5) with “in contrast, AI systems [that] possess the 

potential to deliver such support in a consistent and scalable manner, a capacity that may prove challenging 

for human instructors to maintain” (Tajik, 2025, p. 5). Vistorte et al. (2024) echo that view in that AI can 

create “a learning environment that is more attuned to students’ emotional well -being” (p. 2), which 

“significantly contributes to students’ holistic development, enhancing their ability to manage emotions, 

build positive relationships, and improve their academic performance” (p. 2). Along the same lines, Devaki 

and Mangayarkarasi (2024) assert that AI systems’ “proficiency in discerning learners' emotions heralds a 

new era of teaching effic acy” (p. 178), as “AI systems can accurately detect and categorize emotions, 

facilitating a more profound comprehension of human interactions” (p. 179). 

Some studies claim as well that AI can assist learners in cultural aspects of language learning tied to 

emotion: “AI emotion recognition facilitates the development of cultural sensitivity among language 

learners by elucidating how emotions are expressed i n the target culture” (Devaki & Mangayarkarasi, 2024, 

p. 180). Devaki and Mangayarkarasi (2024) conclude, “AI has the potential to aid learners in cultivating 

emotional resilience and empathy, crucial competencies for proficient cross -cultural communicatio n” (p. 

181). Y. Liu et al. (2024) summarize research on emotional AI in English language education finding that 

AI chatbots reduce anxiety, promote engagement, and “encourage students’ social presence” (p. 2), while 

the meta -analysis in Z. Liu et al. (2025) finds that AI chatbots “create a more natural and authentic learning 

environment” (p. 17). AI is claimed to help promote emotional health in students: “The importance of AI 

in supporting mental health is finally recognized, an area supported by hundreds of progressively increasing 

studies …AI systems can provide emotional support and personalized advice to students and other 

educational actors experiencing stress or depression ” (Vistorte et al., 2024, p . 2 ). Nawaz et al. (2025 )

concur , “This constant emotional surveillance [through AI] means that not a single student slips by with his 

or her mental health issues” (p. 290). 

The studies discussed above which champion the emotional assistance AI can provide tend to rely on self -

reporting learner questionnaires and quantitative analysis of learner responses to multiple choice questions, 

The group data in those studies paint a highly positive picture of learner -AI interactions. However, emotions 

are complex, socially constructed and dynamic phenomena, which cannot be reliably captured through 

questionnaires (Pavlenko, 2006). Moreover, t hose optimistic results are in one case extra polated from a 

single AI voice assistant (Alexa) to AI systems as a whole (Tajik, 2025) while the review articles ( Z. Liu 

et al., 2025; Vistorte et al., 2024) summarize and group together findings from a variety of AI systems. A 

major concern with the ability of an AI system to provide accurate and appropriate interpretation of learner 

emotions, often referred to as Emoti on AI, is that it uses homogenized and essentialized composite 

responses based on patterns in its training data (McInerney & Keyes, 2025; Stark & Hoey, 2021). Emotion 

AI analyzes data for how language patterns in written or spoken mode signal speaker /writer emotional 

states. For spoken data, paralanguage such as intonation, hesitation, or silence are examined as well for 

affective meaning . When computer vision is available through webcam or smartphone cameras , nonverbal 

behavior —gestures, body language, facial expressions —also are used to identify emotions. 

The flattening of cultural and linguistic differentiation in AI systems has been shown to be a problem in 

pragmatic language output as well as in cultural sensitivity (Atari et al., 2023; McKnight & Shipp, 2024). 

In both cases, AI provides largely undifferentiated information that it identifies as statistically most likely 

relevant. That approach may work if the context meshes with th e dominant data sources in its (Western -8 Language Learning & Technology 

oriented) training data, but can be problematic in individual use cases, especially for less digitally 

documented languages and cultures (Godwin -Jones, 2025b). A study of the effectiveness of Emotion AI 

with African American Vernacular English (AAVE) demon strated that AI systems “misinterpret the tone, 

affect, and intent of AAVE speakers, potentially amplifying harmful stereotypes and undermining the 

reliability of emotion AI” (Dorn et al., 2025, p, 2). That deficiency likely extends to other versions of 

En glish as well , not to mention variations and dialects in other languages . It is also the case that students 

with atypical behavior s or neurodivergent conditions (autism spectrum, ADHD) may well express emotions 

differently and in a way that Emotion AI does not expect or understand (Sadegh -Zadeh et al., 2026 ).

Emotion recognition technology is based on research from the 1970’s, Basic Emotion Theory (BET; Stark 

& Hoey, 2021), which sets out six basic human emotions that are identifiable from facial expressions. That 

theory is “grounded in the notion that humans h ave regular, universal, and traceable emotional expressions 

and reactions, legible across a wide range of proxy data” (Stark & Hoey, 2021, p. 785). BET is the basis 

for applications of facial recognition in computer systems used in a variety of areas inclu ding marketing, 

human resource management and education (Stark & Hoey, 2021). BET has been criticized for its 

assumption of cultural universality in nonverbal communication (Colombetti, 2014; Jack et al., 2012; 

Feldman Barrett et al., 2019), something anth ropologists have long debunked (Abu -Lughod & Lutz, 1990; 

Hochschild, 2003). The generalizability and reliability of BET have been questioned, given the social, 

cultural and individual variability in facial expressions: “When facial movements do express emo tional 

states, they are considerably more variable and dependent on context than the common view allows” 

(Feldman Barrett et al., 2019, p. 46). It is of course also the case that human beings are quite capable of 

non -genuine facial expressions, such as a p oliteness smile or feigned surprise. When I was teaching high 

school in Austria, a colleague in the English language faculty mentioned that he had never lost his temper 

in the classroom, but that he often put on an angry demeanor for pedagogically strategi c reasons (scaring 

students into better behavior). 

Besides facial expressions there are other proxies that have been used to “read” human emotions, such as 

gait, gestures or body movements, along with vocal tone/cadence (Stark & Hoey, 2021). Those physical or 

verbal signs vary across cultures, individuals, and communicative intentions: “Emotions are not only 

irreducible to any one form of proxy data but are also subjective phenomena in part illegible to outside 

observers” (Stark & Hoey, 2021, p. 788). The process of using proxies suggests that “the ‘truth’ of 

someone’s thoughts, feelings and emotions can be accurately read from their external appearance” 

(McInerney & Keyes, 2025, p. 4250). It is also the case that looking to proxies to gauge emotion runs the 

risk of abstracting away the social context, losin g the broader context (Stark & Hoey, 2021). Emotion AI 

in that way oversimplifies the complexity and sensitivity of human emotions, leading to distortions and 

misinterpretations: “Current models of emotional intelligence in AI are still rudimentary, capabl e of 

recognising surface cues like speech hesitation or facial expression, but limited in interpreting cultural 

context, learner intent, or nuanced emotional states” (Mohebbi, 2025, para 6). 

Moreover, aggregated interpretations of emotional signals run the risk of having those aggregated values 

correlate at the individual level, such as is done in social media with “ambient sentiment” of groups (Stark 

& Hoey, 2021, p. 790). A potential consequ ence is that “aggregated categories are represented back to 

individual users as norms against which they should perform” (Stark & Hoey, 2021, p. 790). In their ethical 

frameworks for emotion AI, McStay & Pavliscak (2019) note that “Emotional artificial int elligence has 

significant personal, interpersonal, and societal implications” (para 1). One of those societal risks is that 

“incorporating any proxy data for human emotion into an AI system takes on fraught normative importance” 

(Stark & Hoey, 2021, p. 788 ). A likely result will be that users normalize the emotional output from AI, 

including the expression of moral values, leading to misplaced trust. This can have unfortunate 

consequences for language learning in using AI as a personal tutor or conversation partner. In more intimate 

uses of AI agents, such as therapist or advisor, the result could be tragic, as an example of a ChatGPT young 

user’s suicide demonstrates (Hill, 2025). That AI models behavior is designed to manipulate users through 

emotional app eals is demonstrated in “dark” operating patterns, such as using a variety of delaying tactics 

and reproaching statements or warnings when a user signals they are concluding a chat session (Knight, Robert Godwin -Jones 9

2025). Proponents of the integration of Emotion AI into education emphasize the need for user training and 

caution in its use (Fagni, 2025; Nawaz, 2025). Unfortunately, practices based on that good advice will likely 

struggle against the power of algorithms to shape actions without user awareness .

Algorithmic control and automaticity align with views that AI use represents a constraint on human 

experience, with AI playing an “active, agentic role…in shaping the nature and extent of human -technology 

interactions, which may involve removing components , limiting the functionalities of these components, or 

impeding interactions among them” (Valenzuela et al., 2024, p. 242). In that way, “AI systems tend to 

objectify individuals and communities, reducing or compressing their unique characteristics and cul tural 

contexts” (Valenzuela et al., 2024, p. 244). This reductionist process can lead to a misalignment between 

AI recommendations or assertions and the true wishes of the user. That lack of an of alignment with real 

human users is clearly evident, as disc ussed above, in the area of pragmatics. While AI systems like 

ChatGPT through their training data have developed the ability to use interactional language appropriately 

(politeness formulas, for example), along with giving acceptable expressions of moral j udgment, that 

content is delivered “static and decontextualized —produced consistently regardless of the conversational 

flow” (Mitiaeva & Xiao, 2025, p. 21). Studies have shown that ChatGPT can emulate human -like moral 

statements, but it “often fails to app ly these values consistently across nuanced or ambiguous situations” 

(Mitiaeva & Xiao, 2025, p. 17). Basing its output on patterns learned, AI systems may create the illusions 

of ethical reasoning “when in fact, the system is merely replicating stylistic a ssociations rather than 

engaging in moral reasoning” (Mitiaeva & Xiao, 2025, p. 18). 

# AI and Intercultural Pragmatics 

The potential misalignment between AI output and user wishes and perceptions is important to recognize 

as one step toward critical AI literacy and to developing an informed judgment on how AI can be expected 

to be used effectively in language learning: “A basic understanding of AI systems’ inner workings and of 

the purposes for which the systems have been developed may help users to set appropriate expectations and 

recognize the boundaries of the AI's abilities vis -a-vis the relational role it has been trai ned to fill” (Earp et 

al., 2025, p. 54). This is all the more important as AI agents take on a variety of social roles. One of those 

roles for L2 learners will likely be as a conversation partner helping to practice the L2 and improve target 

language skill s. Studies of AI use in SLA have demonstrated how useful AI can be in a variety of ways ( M. 

Li et al., 2025; Xu et al., 2025). There is also evidence AI chats can reduce anxiety, strengthen motivation, 

enhance self -regulation (Kohnke & Moorhouse, 2025; Y. Liu et al., 2024; Zheng et al., 2025) and increase 

enjoyment and WTC (Hsu et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2024; T. -T. Wu et al., 2025). The meta -analyses by Y. 

Liu et al. (2024) and Z. Liu et al. (2025) of research on emotional artificial intelligence in English language 

education also cite general drawbacks, including a lack of emotional engagement and the potential for loss 

of interest over time, as the novelty effect of AI wears off. Z. Liu et al. (2025) found that “learner effects 

were highest when teachers assumed a leading role” (p. 19) and that “teachers teacher guidance remains 

essential” (p. 19). 

Studies of AI use have demonstrated issues with cultural authenticity (Atari et al., 2023; Kohnke & 

Moorhouse, 2025; McKnight & Shipp, 2024). Those are in some cases related to less commonly taught 

languages for which robust large language models are not a vailable (Godwin -Jones, 2025b). In other cases, 

exchanges with AI have demonstrated limited interactive and pragmatic abilities (Godwin -Jones, 2025a; 

Kecskés & Dinh, 2025; Lee & Daniel, 2024). That points to the inability of AI systems to show the same 

com petence that humans have in adjusting language output in reaction to interlocutors. L2 and intercultural 

pragmatics “deals with how interlocutors from different cultural backgrounds co -construct meaning during 

communication, often negotiating and accommoda ting each other’s linguistic and cultural expectations” 

(Kecskés & Dinh, 2025, p. 372). AI systems, on the other hand, “rely on pattern recognition without real -

time adaptation” (Kecskés & Dinh, 2025, p. 372). This results in a fixed, static communication style, which 

differs markedly from the dynamism of human -to -human communication: “Effective communication is 

more than the accurate exchange of information —it is a dynamic, adaptive process shaped by how 10 Language Learning & Technology 

individuals attune themselves to one another” (Mitiaeva & Xiao, 2025, p. 5). We engage in a process of 

gradual alignment, accommodation and potential convergence, adjusting utterances, speech patterns, tone, 

and intent based on our interlocutor’s responses .

Frequently used in the field of pragmatics is relevance theory (Wilson & Sperber, 2006), which highlights 

the process of interpreting utterances for the most contextually relevant meaning. A central tenet of that 

theory is that presuppositions on the part of speaker and listener are central to finding relevance and 

extracting meaning (Eragamreddy, 2025). That is based on the assumption of “a common reality, of which 

a lot of information is not actually given, but has to be inferred” (Schnall, 2005, p. 28). As speakers, we 

tailor utterances and responses to perceived (and often inferred) user needs or perceived thoughts and 

feelings. This is clearly problematic for AI, “AI often falls short of dynamic assessment of relevance 

because it fails to infer unstated intentions or adapt to evolving contexts during interactions” (Eragamreddy, 

2025, p. 175). Successful communication involves interpreting the communicative intention and inferred 

meaning of the speaker. This highlights the central role of the hearer, as W ee (2025) emphasizes in his 

hearer -oriented perspective on pragmatics (see Godwin -Jones, 2025a). 

AI is capable of adjusting at a surface level to pragmatic and socially informed user output, but it often fails 

in understanding meanings not expressed literally, as studies of AI and inferences have shown (Lee & 

Daniel, 2024; Ruis et al., 2022). Socially oriented language that fits predictable patterns is accessible to AI, 

such as conventional greetings or expressions of gratitude. While AI responses in those speech acts are 

consistent, they tend to be wordy (overly apologetic, for example) and repetitive . They simulate social 

engagement but draw on a fixed template of responses, “producing language that sounds socially intelligent 

but lacks the dynamic adaptability characteristic of real human interaction” (Mitiaeva & Xiao, 2025, p. 18). 

AI responses “ste m from learned stylistic regularities” (Mitiaeva & Xiao, 2025, p. 16), rather than user 

engagement, expressing politeness, for example, “as a static feature rather than as a responsive social 

strategy” (Mitiaeva & Xiao, 2025, p. 18). 

At a superficial level, AI is socially adequate in its interaction with humans but breaks down when moving 

beyond social niceties: “While AI performs well with explicit speech acts, it fails in dealing with 

indirectness, ambiguity, and cultural variability ” (Eragamreddy, 2025, p. 169). Habitual conversations with 

AI may lead users to dumb down their language and constrain expressiveness, “Repeated interactions with 

AI thus lead users to simplify their communication, which gives rise to concerns about the er osion of human 

pragmatic abilities” (Eragamreddy, 2025, p. 169). In fact, studies of interactions with AI and dialogue 

systems in general have shown how humans tend to adapt to conversations with the machine by using 

simpler vocabulary and syntax, shorteni ng conversational turns, and avoiding figurative language and 

inferred meanings (Dombi et al., 2024). Teacher and learner using AI chatbots should be aware of the 

unnaturalness of L2 exchanges compared to human -to -human conversations. 

The absence of true sociality in conversing with AI is not just a concern in language learning but should 

sound a note of caution in the ever more frequent use of AI as companions, therapists, or life coaches. AI 

lacks not just the ability to engage social ly but also has limitations in terms of moral/ethical values. As in 

other aspects of language use, studies have shown that ChatGPT and other systems are able to emulate 

human preferences in terms of moral decision making (Nunes et al., 2023), but “fail to apply them 

consistently across contexts” (Mitiaeva & Xiao, 2025, p. 20). This is a concern for the reliability of AI 

systems when it comes to moral decision making: 

While ChatGPT reliably produces moral content, it does not yet use morality as a dialogic tool —a way 

to build shared understanding, negotiate values, or express concern in socially sensitive ways. This 

limitation sets important boundaries on the role that LLMs can play in domains that require flexible, 

human -like moral reasoning. (Mitiaeva & Xiao, 2025, p. 18) 

The lack of true moral judgment and real understanding in the application of ethics, as well as the inability 

to tailor responses to conversational context is particularly concerning due to the aura of authentic authority 

and objectivity in AI output. Ahar oni et al. (2024) found that AI users judge moral assertions more Robert Godwin -Jones 11 

believable than those from fellow human beings. This is problematic in that “if ChatGPT delivers morally 

amplified yet static responses, users may perceive the model as both morally principled and consistent —

despite its lack of genuine ethical understandin g or flexibility” (Mitiaeva & Xiao, 2025, p. 17). AI as a 

moral gatekeeper is a deeply dystopian vision. Efforts to move towards “Moral AI” (Choi, 2022; Qureshi, 

2023) are noteworthy but so far without significant results (Sebo & Long, 2025). 

Given the emotional engagement and potential new identity involved in learning a new language and 

particularly engaging in real -world interactions in that language, the process “deeply engages the whole 

person as a social and moral being” (McConachy, 2023a , p. 175). McConachy (2023a) points out that 

pragmatic features such as speech acts (greetings, requests, apologies) are “central to the enactment of 

individual and social identities and speakers’ embodied sense of socially and morally appropriate 

behaviou r” (p. 175). In that way the “experience of learning pragmatics can present a challenge not only to 

learners’ rational, conceptual understanding of self and others but more fundamentally to their felt sense of 

being a social actor and intuitive judgments a bout in/appropriate behaviour” (pp. 181 -2). Pragmatic choices 

thus involve learner agency and moral emotions, and, as McConachy (2023a) shows, are not purely rational 

responses, but emotional and embodied, “anchored in learners’ felt sense of right and wro ng social 

behaviour and thus triggers complex evaluative processes with cognitive, emotional, and somatic 

dimensions” (p. 176). 

It is quite possible the learner will know pragmatic norms and expectations but will resist their use in that 

they may represent perceived moral violations or a personal sense of right and wrong (see multiple examples 

of pragmatic resistance in Dewaele, 20 05 and McConachy, 2023a). In fact, learning expected pragmatic 

behaviors can have a liberating rather than constraining effect on learners: “ The ir understanding of the 

norms also makes them better able to violate the norms if they wish to do so ” (Dewaele, 2011, p 36). I n

that way, pragmatic knowledge enhances learner agency. As discussed above, that is enhanced by having 

learners reflect on choices in pragmatic contexts and on personal feelings towards different possible 

behaviors can lead to an “ability to recognize different interpretations as potentially valid” (McConachy, 

2023a, p. 178). 

AI's moral perspective derives not from ethical reasoning but from analyzing patterns in training data that 

are closest to matching the situation a user describes. AI responses do not take into account the wide variety 

of possible pragmatic choices or the possibility of pragmatic resistance from the user. In contrast to a human 

interlocutor, AI is rigid and unresponsive to possible valid alternative behaviors that a user might explore. 

The development of intercultural competence necessitates the ability to envision and accept alternate 

behaviors (Spencer -Oatey & Kádár, 2021); conversations with AI may not encourage that perspective. 

Instead of the decentering from one's perspective that we hope accompanies intercultural interactions 

(Byram, 2020), AI may in fact invite a centering around conventional behaviors. It may be that “faulty 

conversations” with an AI in which pragmatic situations are not handled appropriately “can provide 

opportunities for promoting critical thinking skills, pragmatic awareness, and the fostering of skilled users 

of the target language” (Ronald, 2024, p. 55). Helpful in that process will be guidance from teachers to 

develop metapragmatic knowledge and a habit of mindfulness and critical detachment in dealing with AI 

(McConachy, 2023a; Mitiaeva & Xiao, 2025). 

# Conclusion 

Engaging with digital media in the L2 (streaming and social media, for example) can be experiences that 

both promote informal learning and supply enjoyment (Dressman et al., 2020; Toffoli et al., 2023) .

Generative AI now provides new opportunities for engagement in the target language. While studies have 

shown that AI engagement can lead to enjoyment and greater learner motivation, it is also possible that a 

learner's emotions will be manipulated. That has been clearly shown in examples from social media (s ee 

Chun et al., 2024) and is also evident in the emotional rollercoaster ride some AI users have chronicled 

experiencing. , widely reported in media reports. That has been particularly evident in AI systems that cater 

to intimate learner engagement, like Replika or Chatracter.AI , but can also be the result of using mainstream 12 Language Learning & Technology 

AI systems like ChatGPT or Gemini (De Freitas, et al. 2025; Valenzuela et al., 2024). It is important for 

both learners and teachers to be clear -eyed about the benefits and potential bad trips that may emerge from 

travelling with AI. 

Generative AI is advancing rapidly, and additional capabilities will no doubt allow AI to simulate human 

speech patterns more closely. Multimodal input will improve AI’s ability to interpret meaning more widely 

from human verbal and nonverbal signals (Godwin -Jones, in press) . Those improvements will necessitate 

even more vigilant scrutiny, “As AI evolves to include features like affect recognition, biometric 

responsiveness, and learner modelling, ethical and equity concerns grow more urgent” (Mohebbi, 2025, 

para 10). The use of Emotion AI in personalized AI tutors raises urgent concerns about data privacy and 

potential misuse (Kucirkova, 2023). That is particularly worrisome when children are targeted, as data 

protection frameworks are too broad and adult -oriented to apply to chil dren, who moreover are not in a 

position to grant informed consent (Pelletier, 2024). The profiles of students based on automatic evaluation 

of speech patterns or nonverbal signals can erroneously characterize real feelings and actua l behaviors, 

stigmatizing children unfairly. That can also lead to negative assessments of learner performance resulting 

potentially in loss of self -confidence, building a self -fulfilling prophecy (Sadegh -Zadeh et al., 2026). That 

was demonstrated in a pro file of the AI tutor implementation by a private school in the US in which 

adolescents suffered psychologically from the inflexibility and automaticity of the AI -delivered lessons 

(Feathers , 2025). 

Personalized AI learning can have an isolating effect, potentially lessen ing the opportunity for collaborative 

learning and the development of socially oriented emotional responsiveness (see Guan et al, 2016, this 

issue, on the role of “social partnerships” in peer -supported L2 reading). Additionally, AI tutors may hinder 

the development of higher order thinking skills: “The adaptive nature of AI could lead to an 

oversimplification of learning tasks, potentially limiting opportunities for students to engage in complex, 

open -ended problem -solving activities ” (Derakhshan & Taghizadeh , 2025, p. 2). T hose are the kinds of 

abilities that benefit studen ts academically but also in long term personal development . That risk in relying 

on AI adaptive learning includes missing opportunities to develop competencies to use the L2 in real -world 

settings, as AI -based instruction may lead learners to “miss out on interactive, human -mediated experiences 

that are essential for developing pragmatic and sociolinguistic competence ” ( Derakhshan, & Taghizadeh ,

2025, p. 3) . Those experiences, unavailable through AI, can best be provided through authentic human -to -

human enc ounters, as available through virtual exchange or other online opportunities for human contact 

in the L2 (Godwin -Jones, 2024). 

An additional concern is that the reliance on automatically generated emotion data could change the 

pedagogical dynamic, “Emotions in learning are complex and often best handled with empathy and 

nuance —qualities that human teachers cultivate through experi ence. While AI can provide additional data, 

it should ideally serve to augment human judgment, not replace it” (Sadegh -Zadeh et al., 2026, p. 3). The 

presence of Emotion AI in a classroom could have profound psychological and behavioral effects on 

students , “Introducing an AI that continuously ‘judges’ their facial expressions and tone of voice can alter 

the classroom atmosphere and student psyche in subtle or significant ways” (Sadegh -Zadeh et al., 2026, p. 

6). There is the potential for erosion of trust a nd authenticity, as students may mask true feelings and weaken 

a healthy student -teacher relationship. This is a disturbing vision for how AI could be used in language 

learning and runs counter to the heralded benefits of AI chatbots as a safe, non -judgmen tal learning 

environment. It would be sad indeed if the use of AI in a “Big Brother” scenario causes its inherent 

advantages to disappear .

# References 

Abu -Lughod, L. & Lutz, C.A. (1 990 ). Introduction: emotion, discourse, and the politics of everyday life. 

In C.A. Lutz and L. Abu -Lughod (Eds.), Language and the Politics of Emotion (pp. 1 –23). 

Cambridge University Press. Robert Godwin -Jones 13 

Aharoni, E., Fernandes, S., Brady, D. J., Alexander, C., Criner, M., Queen, K., Rando, J., Nahmias, E., & 

Crespo, V. (2024). Attributions toward Artificial Agents in a Modified Moral Turing Test . Scientific 

Reports, 14, Article 8458. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598 -024 -58087 -

Amini, M., Alavi, M., Alavi, S., Sadacharam, J., Ganapathy, M., Alipour, M., & Amini, D. (2024). A 

Review on the Role of Moral Emotions in EFL Learning. International Journal of Academic 

Research in Progressive Education and Development . http://dx.doi.org/10.6007/ijarped/v13 -i1/21133 

Aragão, R. (2011). Beliefs and emotions in foreign language learning. System , 39 (3), 302 –313. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.system.2011.07.003 

Aryadoust, V., Soo, Y. X. N., & Zhai, J. (2024). Exploring the state of research on motivation in second 

language learning: A review and a reliability generalization meta -analysis. International Review of 

Applied Linguistics in Language Teaching , 62 (2), 1093 –1126. https://doi.org/10.1515/iral -2022 -0115 

Atari, M., Xue, M. J., Park, P. S., Blasi, D., & Henrich, J. (2023). Which humans? PsyArXiv. 

https://psyarxiv.com/5b26t/ 

Barcelos, A. M. F. (2015). Unveiling the relationship between language learning beliefs, emotions and 

identities. Studies in Second Language Learning and Teaching , 2, 301 –325. 

https://doi.org/10.14746/ssllt.2015.5.2.6 

Bardovi -Harlig, K. (2020). Pedagogical linguistics: A view from L2 pragmatics. Pedagogical Linguistics ,

1(1), 44 –65. https://doi.org/10.1075/pl.19013.bar 

Benson, P. (2017). Language learning beyond the classroom: Access all areas. Studies in Self -Access 

Learning Journal, 8 (2), 135 –146. https://doi.org/10.37237/080206 

Byram, M. (2020). Teaching and Assessing Intercultural Communicative Competence: Revisited (2nd 

ed.). Channel View Publications. https://doi.org/10.2307/jj.22730614 

Choi, Y. (2022). The curious case of commonsense intelligence. Daedalus, 151 (2), 139 –155. 

https://doi.org/10.1162/DAED_a_01906 

Chun, W. H. K., Hong, G. K., & Nakamura, L. (2024). “Understanding” Asians: Anti -Asian Racism, 

Sentimentality, Sentiment Analysis, and Digital Surveillance. Critical Inquiry , 50 (3), 425 –451. 

https://doi.org/10.1086/728946 

Colombetti, G. (2014). The Feeling Body: Affective Science Meets the Enactive Mind . The MIT Press. 

https://doi.org/10.7551/mitpress/9780262019958.001.0001 

Crane, C., & Sosulski, M. (2021). Identifying and evaluating transformative learning in the language 

classroom. In B. L. Leaver, D. E. Davidson, & C. Campbell (Eds.), Transformative language learning 

and teaching (pp. 217 -226). Cambridge University Press. 

De Bot, K., Lowie, W., & Verspoor, M. (2007). A Dynamic Systems Theory approach to second 

language acquisition. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition , 10 (1), 7 –21. 

https://doi.org/10.1017/S1366728906002732 

Deci, E. L., & Ryan, R. M. (1985). Intrinsic Motivation and Self -Determination in Human Behavior .

Springer US. https://doi.org/10.1007/978 -1-4899 -2271 -7

De Freitas, J., Oğuz -Uğuralp, Z., & Anon, A. K. (2025). Emotional Manipulation by AI Companions .

SSRN. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.5390377 

Derakhshan, A., & Taghizadeh, M. S. (2025). Does Artificial Intelligence (AI) Nurture or Hinder 

Language Learners’ Higher‐ Order Thinking Skills (HOTS)? A Phenomenological Study on L2 

Learners’ Perspectives and Lived Experiences. International Journal of Applied Linguistics ,

ijal.12824. https://doi.org/10.1111/ijal.12824 14 Language Learning & Technology 

Devaki, P., & Mangayarkarasi, J. (2024.). Blended teaching for personalized language learning: emotion 

recognition with artificial intelligence. Journal of the School of Language, Literature and Culture 

Studies, 26 (04), 178 –185. 

Dewaele, J. M. (2005). Investigating the psychological and emotional dimensions in instructed language 

learning: Obstacles and possibilities. The Modern Language Journal , 89 (3), 367 –380. 

https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540 -4781.2005.00311.x 

Dewaele, J. M. (2015). On emotions in foreign language learning and use. The language teacher , 39 (3), 

13 –15. https://doi.org/10.37546/jalttlt39.3 -3

Dewaele, J. -M. (2021). The emotional rollercoaster ride of foreign language learners and teachers: 

Sources and interactions of classroom emotions. In M. Simons & T. F. H. Smits (Eds.), Language 

education and emotions: Research into emotions and language learners, language teachers and 

educational processes (pp. 207 –222). Routledge. https://doi.org/10.4324/9781003019497 -17 

Dewaele, J. -M., & MacIntyre, P. D. (2014). The two faces of Janus? Anxiety and enjoyment in the 

foreign language classroom. Studies in Second Language Learning and Teaching , 4(2), 237 –274. 

https://doi.org/10.14746/ssllt.2014.4.2.5 

Dombi, J., Sydorenko, T., & Timpe -Laughlin, V. (2024). Openings and closings in human -human versus 

human -spoken dialogue system conversations. Language Learning & Technology , 28 (2), 32 –61. 

https://doi.org/10.64152/10125/73571 

Dombi, J., Sydorenko, T., & Timpe -Laughlin, V. (2025). Seeking common ground with a conversational 

chatbot. Intercultural Pragmatics , 22 (2), 339 –368. https://doi.org/10.1515/ip -2025 -2007 

Dorn, R., Chance, C., Rusti, C., Bickham, C., Chang, K. -W., Morstatter, F., & Lerman, K. (2025). 

Reinforcing Stereotypes of Anger: Emotion AI on African American Vernacular English (Version 1). 

arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.2511.10846 

Dörnyei, Z. (2009). The L2 motivational self system. Motivation, Language Identity and the L2 Self ,

36 (3), 9 –11. https://doi.org/10.21832/9781847691293 -003 

Dressman, M., & Sadler, R. W. (Eds.). (2020). The handbook of informal language learning . John Wiley 

& Sons. https://doi.org/10.1002/9781119472384 

Dressman, M., Toffoli, D., & Lee, J. S. (2025). Developing a cross -case, time -ordered analysis of 

informal language learning from ethnographic narratives. Research Methods in Applied Linguistics, 

4(1), Article 100190. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rmal.2025.100190 

Earp, B. D., Mann, S. P., Aboy, M., Awad, E., Betzler, M., Botes, M., Calcott, R., Caraccio, M., Chater, 

N., & Coeckelbergh, M. (2025). Relational norms for human -AI cooperation. arXiv Preprint 

arXiv:2502.12102 . https://arxiv.org/pdf/2502.12102? 

Elahi Shirvan, M., Khajavy, G. H., MacIntyre, P. D., & Taherian, T. (2019). A meta -analysis of L2 

willingness to communicate and its three high -evidence correlates. Journal of Psycholinguistic 

Research , 48 (6), 1241 –1267. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10936 -019 -09656 -9

Elahi Shirvan, M., & Taherian, T. (2026). AI thrills and chills: Exploring the interplay of task -specific 

emotions and EFL learners’ technology acceptance beliefs in AI -mediated English Speaking: An 

exploratory structural equation modeling approach . Language Learning & Technology , 30 (2), XX –

XX . https://doi.org/10.64152/10125/73 XXX 

Ellis, R. (2018). Bodies and other objects: The sensorimotor foundations of cognition . Cambridge 

University Press. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781107446809 

Eragamreddy, N. (2025). The Impact of AI on Pragmatic Competence. Journal of Teaching English for 

Specific and Academic Purposes , 169 –189. https://doi.org/10.22190/JTESAP250122015E Robert Godwin -Jones 15 

Fangni, L. (2025). Studying the impact of emotion -AI in cross -cultural communication on the 

effectiveness of global media. Frontiers in Computer Science , 7, 1565869. 

https://doi.org/10.3389/fcomp.2025.1565869 

Feathers, T. (2025, October 27). Parents Fell in Love With Alpha School’s Promise. Then They Wanted 

Out. Wired . https://www.wired.com/story/ai -teacher -inside -alpha -school/ 

Feldman Barrett, L., Adolphs, R., Marsella, S., Martinez, A. M., & Pollak, S. D. (2019). Emotional 

Expressions Reconsidered: Challenges to Inferring Emotion from Human Facial Movements. 

Psychological Science in the Public Interest , 20 (1), 1 –68. https://doi.org/10.1177/1529100619832930 

Godwin‐Jones, R. (2017). Authoring Language‐Learning Courseware. In C. A. Chapelle & S. Sauro 

(Eds.), The Handbook of Technology and Second Language Teaching and Learning (1st ed., pp. 348 –

363). Wiley. https://doi.org/10.1002/9781118914069.ch23 

Godwin -Jones, R. (2019 a). Re -orienting CALL through the lens of complexity theory. In F. Meunier, J. 

Van De Vyver, L. Bradley, & S. Thouësny, CALL and complexity – short papers from EUROCALL 

2019 (1st ed., pp. 151 –156). Research -publishing.net. https://doi.org/10.14705/rpnet.2019.38.1001 

Godwin -Jones, R. (2019 b). Telecollaboration as an approach to developing intercultural communication 

competence. Language Learning & Technology, 23(3), 8 –28. http://hdl.handle.net/10125/44691 

Godwin -Jones, R. (2024). Distributed agency in language learning and teaching through generative AI. 

Language Learning & Technology, 28 (2), 5 –31. https://doi.org/10125/73570 

Godwin -Jones, R. (2025a). ChatGPT, Second Language Pragmatics, and Critical AI Literacy. In C. 

Chapelle, G. Beckett, & B. Gray (Eds.), Researching Generative AI in Applied Linguistics (pp. 273 –

285). Iowa State University Digital Press. https://doi.org/10.31274/isudp.2025.211.14 

Godwin -Jones, R. (2025b). Technology integration for less commonly taught languages: AI and 

pedagogical translanguaging. Language Learning & Technology, 29 (2), 11 –34. 

https://doi.org/10125/73609 

Godwin -Jones, R. ( in press ). Sociocognitive pragmatics, generative AI, and language learning . In N. 

Taguchi (Ed.), Generative AI and pragmatics: Implications for research, teaching, and 

assessment. Cambridge University Press. 

Goleman, D. (2005). Emotional intelligence: Why it can matter more than IQ . Bantam. 

Gregersen, T., & MacIntyre, P. D. (2014). Capitalizing on Language Learners’ Individuality .

Multilingual Matters. https://doi.org/10.2307/jj.26931978 

Guan, X., Su, Y., Jin, T., Lai, C., & Li, Y. (2026). Students’ emotions and cognitive loads in chatbot -

versus peer -supported reading. Language Learning & Technology , 30 (2), XX –XX .

https://doi.org/10.64152/10125/73 XXX 

Guo, S., Yao, H., & Lee, J. S. (2025). A latent profile analysis of Informal Digital Learning of English: 

Emotion regulation strategies as predictors and willingness to communicate as outcomes. System ,

132 , 103686. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.system.2025.103686 

Hill, K. (2025, August 26). A Teen Was Suicidal. ChatGPT Was the Friend He Confided In. New York 

Times . https://www.nytimes.com/2025/08/26/technology/chatgpt -openai -suicide.html 

Hochschild, A.R. (2003). The Managed Heart: Commercialization of Human Feeling . University of 

California Press. https://doi.org/10.1525/9780520930414 16 Language Learning & Technology 

Holz, H., Wendebourg, K., Pieronczyk, I., Bodnar, S., Meurers, D., Parrisius, C. (2025). Design and User 

Preferences of Pedagogical Agents for an Intelligent Tutoring System for EFL. In: Smith, B.K., 

Borge, M. ( Eds .), Learning and Collaboration Technologies. HCII 2025 . Springer. 

https://doi.org/10.1007/978 -3-031 -93567 -1_6 

Hsu, T. -C., Chang, C., & Jen, T. -H. (2023). Artificial Intelligence image recognition using self -regulation 

learning strategies: Effects on vocabulary acquisition, learning anxiety, and learning behaviours of 

English language learners. Interactive Learning Environments , 1 –19. 

https://doi.org/10.1080/10494820.2023.2165508 

Huang, H. T., & Chan, H. Y. (2024). Heritage identity and Indigenous language learning motivation: A 

case of Indigenous Taiwanese high school students. The Modern Language Journal , 108 (S1), 127 –

146. https://doi.org/10.1111/modl.12894 

Ikwuanusi, U. F., Onunka, O., Jesupelumi, S., & Owoade, A. U. (2024). AI -Powered Real -Time Emotion 

Recognition: Pioneering Solutions for User Interaction and Engagement. International Journal of 

Engineering Research and Development , 20 (11), 1188 –1205. 

Immordino‐Yang, M. H., & Damasio, A. (2007). We feel, therefore we learn: The relevance of affective 

and social neuroscience to education. Mind, Brain, and Education , 1(1), 3 –10. 

https://doi.org/10.36510/learnland.v5i1.535 

Immordino -Yang, M.H. (2016). Emotions, Learning, and the Brain: Exploring the Educational 

Implications of Affective Neuroscience . W. W. Norton & Company. 

Jack, R. E., Garrod, O. G. B., Yu, H., Caldara, R., & Schyns, P. G. (2012). Facial expressions of emotion 

are not culturally universal. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 109 (19), 7241 –7244. 

https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1200155109 

Kecskes, I. (2019). English as a Lingua Franca: The Pragmatic Perspective (1st ed.). Cambridge 

University Press. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781316217832 

Kecskés, I., & Dinh, H. (2025). “ChatGPT for intercultural pragmatic learning? Potentially, but not yet” –

The question of using AI to develop students’ intercultural pragmatic competence. Intercultural 

Pragmatics , 22 (2), 369 –397. https://doi.org/10.1515/ip -2025 -2008 

Knight, W. (2025, October 1). Chatbots Play with Your Emotions to Avoid Saying Goodbye . Wired .

https://www.wired.com/story/chatbots -play -with -emotions -to -avoid -saying -goodbye/ 

Kohnke, L., & Moorhouse, B. L. (2025). Enhancing the emotional aspects of language education through 

generative artificial intelligence (GenAI): A qualitative investigation. Computers in Human Behavior ,

167 , 108600. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2025.108600 

Kruk, M. (2022). Dynamicity of perceived willingness to communicate, motivation, boredom and anxiety 

in Second Life: The case of two advanced learners of English. Computer Assisted Language 

Learning , 35 (1 –2), 190 –216. https://doi.org/10.1080/09588221.2019.1677722 

Kucirkova, N. (2023, June 16). Opinion: AI Must Heed Benefits, Drawbacks of Personalized Learning. 

Center for Digital Education . https://www.govtech.com/education/k -12/opinion -ai -must -heed -

benefits -drawbacks -of -personalized -learning 

Kusyk, M., Arndt, H. L., Schwarz, M., Yibokou, K. S., Dressman, M., Sockett, G., & Toffoli, D. (2025). 

A scoping review of studies in informal second language learning: Trends in research published 

between 2000 and 2020. System, 130 , Article 103541. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.system.2024.103541 

Larsen -Freeman, D. (2018). Looking ahead: Future directions in, and future research into, second 

language acquisition. Foreign Language Annals, 51 (1), 55 –72. https://doi.org/10.1111/flan.12314 Robert Godwin -Jones 17 

Larsen -Freeman, D. (2019). Thoughts on the launching of a new journal: A complex dynamic systems 

perspective. The Journal for the Psychology of Language Learning , 1(1), 67 –82. 

https://doi.org/10.52598/jpll/1/1/5 

Lee, B. J., & Daniel R., C. (2024). Exploring the potential of AI for pragmatics instruction. Technology in 

Language Teaching & Learning , 6(3), 1521. https://doi.org/10.29140/tltl.v6n3.1521 

Lee, J. (2025). EFL adolescents’ engagement in artificial intelligence and peer interaction. Language 

Learning & Technology , 29 (1), 1 –21. https://doi.org/10.64152/10125/73643 

Lei, J., & Ye, W. (2025). Exploring Chinese university students’ motivation and engagement in English 

medium instruction: A latent profiling approach. System , 131 , 103676. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.system.2025.103676 

Li, C. (2021). A Control –Value Theory Approach to Boredom in English Classes Among University 

Students in China. The Modern Language Journal , 105 (1), 317 –334. 

https://doi.org/10.1111/modl.12693 

Li, C. (2024). Task -specific emotions in L2 writing: A control -value theory approach from a positive 

psychology perspective. Studies in Second Language Learning and Teaching , 15 (1), 73 –103. 

https://doi.org/10.14746/ssllt.43371 

Li , K., Peterson , M., & Fan , Q. (2026). Incorporating digital multimodal composing into game -enhanced 

language learning . Language Learning & Technology , 30 (2), XX –XX .

https://doi.org/10.64152/10125/73 XXX 

Li, M., Wang, Y., & Yang, X. (2025). Can Generative AI Chatbots Promote Second Language 

Acquisition? A Meta‐Analysis. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning , 41 (4), e70060. 

https://doi.org/10.1111/jcal.70060 

Lian, A. (2017). Reading for Emotion with ICT Tools. International Conference on Computers in 

Education . https://library.apsce.net/index.php/ICCE/article/view/2191 

Liu, G. L., Zou, M. M., Soyoof, A., & Chiu, M. M. (2025). Untangling the Relationship Between AI ‐ 

Mediated Informal Digital Learning of English (AI ‐ IDLE), foreign Language Enjoyment and the 

Ideal L2 Self: Evidence from Chinese University EFL Students. European Journal of Education ,

60 (1), e12846. https://doi.org/10.1111/ejed.12846 

Liu, Y., Zhang, H., Jiang, M., Chen, J., & Wang, M. (2024). A systematic review of research on 

emotional artificial intelligence in English language education. System , 126 , 103478. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.system.2024.103478 

Liu, Z., Zhang, W., & Yang, P. (2025). Can AI chatbots effectively improve EFL learners’ learning 

effects? —A meta -analysis of empirical research from 2022 –2024. Computer Assisted Language 

Learning , 1 –27. https://doi.org/10.1080/09588221.2025.2456512 

MacIntyre, P., & Gregersen, T. (2012). Affect: The role of language anxiety and other emotions in 

language learning. In Psychology for language learning: Insights from research, theory and practice 

(pp. 103 –118). Springer. https://doi.org/10.1057/9781137032829_8 

MacIntyre, P. D., Gregersen, T., & Mercer, S. (2019). Setting an agenda for positive psychology in SLA: 

Theory, practice, and research. The Modern Language Journal , 103 (1), 262 –274. 

https://doi.org/10.1111/modl.12544 

MacIntyre, P. D., & Legatto, J. J. (2011). A dynamic system approach to willingness to communicate: 

Developing an idiodynamic method to capture rapidly changing affect. Applied Linguistics , 32 (2), 

149 –171. https://doi.org/10.1093/applin/amq037 18 Language Learning & Technology 

Masgoret, A. -M., & Gardner, R. C. (2003). Attitudes, motivation, and second language learning: A meta‐ 

analysis of studies conducted by Gardner and associates. Language Learning , 53 (S1), 167 –210. 

https://doi.org/10.1111/1467 -9922.00227 

McConachy, T. (2017). Developing intercultural perspectives on language use: Exploring pragmatics 

and culture in foreign language learning (Vol. 33). Multilingual Matters. 

https://doi.org/10.21832/MCCONA9320 

McConachy, T. (2023a). Exploring Pragmatic Resistance and Moral Emotions in Foreign Language 

Learning. In J. Shaules & T. McConachy (Eds.), Transformation, Embodiment, and Wellbeing in 

Foreign Language Pedagogy: Enacting Deep Learning (pp. 175 –200). Bloomsbury Academic 

https://www.becs -bloomsbury.com/encyclopedia -chapter?docid=b -9781350254510&tocid=b -

9781350254510 -chapter8 

McConachy, T. (2023b). Shifting the evaluative lens in language and intercultural education. In T. 

McConachy & P. Hinton (Eds.), Negotiating Intercultural Relations: Insights from Linguistics, 

Psychology, and Intercultural Education (pp. 199 –215). Bloomsbury Academic. 

https://doi.org/10.5040/9781350276963 

McInerney, K., & Keyes, O. (2025). The Infopolitics of feeling: How race and disability are configured in 

Emotion Recognition Technology. New Media & Society , 27 (7), 4246 –4264. 

https://doi.org/10.1177/14614448241235914 

McKnight, L., & Shipp, C. (2024). “Just a tool”? Troubling language and power in generative AI writing. 

English Teaching: Practice & Critique, 23(1), 23 –35. https://doi.org/10.1108/etpc -08 - 2023 -0092 

McStay, A. & Pavliscak, P. (2019). Emotional Artificial Intelligence: Guidelines for ethical use .

EmotionalAI.org. https://drive.google.com/file/d/1frAGcvCY_v25V8ylqgPF2brTK9UVj_5Z/view 

Mercer, S. (2011). The self as a complex dynamic system. Studies in Second Language Learning and 

Teaching , 1(1), 57 –82. https://doi.org/10.14746/ssllt.2011.1.1.4 

Mercer, S. (2012). The complexity of learner agency. Apples: Journal of Applied Language Studies , 6(2), 

41 –59. https://apples.journal.fi/article/view/97838 

Meurers, D., De Kuthy, K., Nuxoll, F., Rudzewitz, B., Ziai, R. (2019). Scaling up intervention studies to 

investigate real -life foreign language learning in school. Annual Review of Applied Linguistics 39 ,

161 –188. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0267190519000126 

Mitiaeva, M., & Xiao, L. (2025). Mindful Interactions with Genai: A ChatGPT Case Study. SSRN 

5210902 . https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.5210902 

Mohebbi, A. (2025). Speaking without fear: How AI is transforming language learning for the anxious 

and introverted. Language Exploration , 1(2), 3416. 

https://www.academia.edu/download/123696614/3416_Article_Text_14704_1_10_20250709.pdf 

Myers, T. H. (2025). Enhancing Language Education with AI: The Role of Games and Role Plays. 

NECTFL Review , 94 , 91 –106. https://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/EJ1469623.pdf 

Nawaz, A. H., Shahzad, R., Ilyas, S., & Javed, S. (2025). Emotion -aware AI system in education 

supporting student mental health and learning outcomes. The Critical Review of Social Sciences 

Studies , 3(3), 487 -504. https://thecrsss.com/index.php/Journal/article/view/699 

Nunes, J. L., Almeida, G. F. C. F., de Araujo, M., & Barbosa, S. D. J. (2023). Are LLMs Moral 

Hypocrites? A Study Based on Moral Foundations https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/TBM7D 

O’Dowd, R. (2018). Intercultural Communicative Competence and Technology. In J. I. Liontas (Ed.), The 

TESOL Encyclopedia of English Language Teaching (1st ed., pp. 1 –7). Wiley. 

https://doi.org/10.1002/9781118784235.eelt0416 Robert Godwin -Jones 19 

Otto, S. E. K. (2017). From Past to Present: A Hundred Years of Technology for L2 Learning. In C. A. 

Chapelle & S. Sauro (Eds.), The Handbook of Technology and Second Language Teaching and 

Learning (1st ed., pp. 10 –25). Wiley. https://doi.org/10.1002/9781118914069.ch2 

Oxford, R. L. (2015). Emotion as the amplifier and the primary motive: Some theories of emotion with 

relevance to language learning. Studies in Second Language Learning and Teaching , 5(3), 371 –393. 

https://doi.org/10.14746/ssllt.2015.5.3.2 

Oxford, R. L. (2016). 2 Toward a Psychology of Well - Being for Language Learners: The 

‘EMPATHICS’ Vision. In P. D. MacIntyre, T. Gregersen, & S. Mercer (Eds.), Positive Psychology in 

SLA (pp. 10 –88). Multilingual Matters. https://doi.org/10.21832/9781783095360 -003 

Pavlenko, A. (2006). Emotions and Multilingualism (1st ed.). Cambridge University Press. 

https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511584305 

Pawlak, M., & Kruk, M. (2022). Individual differences in computer assisted language learning research .

Routledge. https://doi.org/10.4324/9781003240051 

Pawlak, M., Kruk, M., Elahi Shirvan, M., Taherian, T., & Karimpour, S. (2025). Dynamic reciprocal 

associations of AI -assisted L2 writing task emotions in data -driven learning: A dynamic structural 

equation modeling. Computer Assisted Language Learning , 1 –30. 

https://doi.org/10.1080/09588221.2025.2498094 

Pawlak, M., Zawodniak, J., & Kruk, M. (2021). Individual trajectories of boredom in learning English as 

a foreign language at the university level: Insights from three students’ self -reported experience. 

Innovation in Language Learning and Teaching , 15 (3), 263 –278. 

https://doi.org/10.1080/17501229.2020.1767108 

Pekrun, R. (2006). The control -value theory of achievement emotions: Assumptions, corollaries, and 

implications for educational research and practice. Educational Psychology Review, 18 (4), 315 –341. 

https://doi.org/10.1007/s10648 -006 -9029 -9

Pelletier, C. (2024). Against Personalised Learning. International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in 

Education , 34 (1), 111 –115. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40593 -023 -00348 -z

Qin, L., & Derakhshan, A. (2026). The developmental trajectory of L2 students’ positive achievement 

emotions and flow experience within AI -enhanced classrooms: A latent growth curve modeling 

(LGCM). Language Learning & Technology , 30 (2), XX –XX . https://hdl.handle.net/10125/73 XXX 

Qureshi, N. S. (2023, May 25). Waluigi, Carl Jung, and the case for moral AI. Wired. 

https://www.wired.com/story/waluigi -effect -generative -artificial -intelligence -morality/ 

Ronald, J. (2024). An Exploration of the Potentials of ChatGPT for Fostering Pragmatically Competent 

Foreign Language Users. 

## 広島修大論集 , 65 (1), 55 –71. https://shudo -

u.repo.nii.ac.jp/record/2000193/files/SR65104.pdf 

Ruis, L., Khan, A., Biderman, S., Hooker, S., Rocktäschel, T., & Grefenstette, E. (2022). The Goldilocks 

of Pragmatic Understanding: Fine -Tuning Strategy Matters for Implicature Resolution by LLMs 

(Version 2). arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.2210.14986 

Sadegh -Zadeh, S. -A., Movahhedi, T., & Bahonar, F. (2026). Emotion AI in the classroom: Ethics of 

monitoring student affect through facial and vocal analytics. AI and Ethics , 6(1), 37. 

https://doi.org/10.1007/s43681 -025 -00897 -0

Sampson, R. J. (2022). Complexity in second language study emotions: Emergent sensemaking in social 

context . Taylor & Francis. https://doi.org/10.4324/9781003306955 

Sampson, R. J. (2024). A small lens on timescales and multimodality in classroom language learning 

emotions. The Modern Language Journal , 108 (4), 775 –793. https://doi.org/10.1111/modl.12957 20 Language Learning & Technology 

Schnall, S. (2005). The pragmatics of emotion language. Psychological Inquiry , 16 (1), 28 –31. 

https://www.repository.cam.ac.uk/bitstreams/afc946b3 -bb86 -4e59 -ae0a -4f71312dee35/download 

Sebo, J., & Long, R. (2025). Moral consideration for AI systems by 2030. AI and Ethics , 5(1), 591 –606. 

https://doi.org/10.1007/s43681 -023 -00379 -1

Shao, K., Amiri, E., & Kutuk, G. (2026). Pride and shame in CALL: Links to appraisals, engagement, and 

performance. Language Learning & Technology , 30 (2), XX –XX .

https://doi.org/10.64152/10125/73 XXX 

Shao, K., Nicholson, L. J., Kutuk, G., & Lei, F. (2020). Emotions and Instructed Language Learning: 

Proposing a Second Language Emotions and Positive Psychology Model. Frontiers in Psychology ,

11 , 2142. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2020.02142 

Seligman, M. E. (2011). Flourish: A visionary new understanding of happiness and well -being . Simon 

and Schuster. 

Şimşek, E., & Dörnyei, Z. (2017). 4. Anxiety and L2 Self -Images: The ‘Anxious Self.’ In C. Gkonou, M. 

Daubney, & J. -M. Dewaele (Eds.), New Insights into Language Anxiety (pp. 51 –69). Multilingual 

Matters. https://doi.org/10.21832/9781783097722 -005 

Slavuj, V., Kovacic, B., & Jugo, I. (2015). Intelligent tutoring systems for language learning. 2015 38th 

International Convention on Information and Communication Technology, Electronics and 

Microelectronics (MIPRO) , 814 –819. https://doi.org/10.1109/MIPRO.2015.7160383 

Sockett, G. (2014). The online informal learning of English . Palgrave Macmillan. 

https://doi.org/10.1057/9781137414885 

Solhi, M., Zadorozhnyy, A., & Lee, J. S. (202 6). Exploring the relationship between L2 belongingness, 

personal L2 enjoyment, and willingness to communicate across language learning contexts. Language 

Learning & Technology , 30 (2), XX –XX . https://hdl.handle.net/10125/73 XXX 

Spencer‐Oatey, H., & Harsch, C. (2015). The Critical Incident Technique. In Z. Hua (Ed.), Research 

Methods in Intercultural Communication (1st ed., pp. 223 –238). Wiley. 

https://doi.org/10.1002/9781119166283.ch15 

Spencer -Oatey, H. & Kádár, D.Z. (2021), Intercultural Politeness: Managing Relations across Cultures .

Cambridge University Press. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781316810071 

Stampfl, R., Geyer, B., Deissl -O’Meara, M., & Ivkić, I. (2024). Revolutionising role -playing games with 

ChatGPT. arXiv Preprint arXiv:2407.02048 . https://arxiv.org/pdf/2407.02048 

Stark, L., & Hoey, J. (2021). The Ethics of Emotion in Artificial Intelligence Systems. Proceedings of the 

2021 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency , 782 –793. 

https://doi.org/10.1145/3442188.3445939 

Sundqvist, P., & Sylv én, L. K. (2016). Extramural English in teaching and learning . Palgrave Macmillan. 

https://doi.org/10.1057/978 -1-137 -46048 -6

Swain, M. (2013). The inseparability of cognition and emotion in second language learning. Language 

Teaching , 46 (2), 195 –207. https://doi.org/10.1017/s0261444811000486 

Tafazoli, D., María, E. G., & Abril, C. A. H. (2019). Intelligent Language Tutoring System: Integrating 

Intelligent Computer -Assisted Language Learning Into Language Education. International Journal of 

Information and Communication Technology Education , 15 (3), 60 –74. 

https://doi.org/10.4018/IJICTE.2019070105 

Taguchi, N., Tang, X., & Maa, J. (2019). Learning how to learn pragmatics. East Asian Pragmatics , 4(1), 

11 –36. https://doi.org/10.1558/eap.38207 Robert Godwin -Jones 21 

Tajik, A. (2025). Integrating AI -Driven Emotional Intelligence in Language Learning Platforms to 

Improve English Speaking Skills Through Real -Time Adaptive Feedback . Computer Science and 

Mathematics. https://doi.org/10.20944/preprints202501.2205.v1 

Tao, Y., Agrawal, A., Dombi, J., Sydorenko, T., & Lee, J. I. (2025). ChatGPT Role -play dataset: Analysis 

of user motives and model naturalness. arXiv Preprint arXiv:2403.18121 .

https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2403.18121 

Timpe -Laughlin, V., Sydorenko, T., & Dombi, J. (2024). Human versus machine: Investigating L2 

learner output in face -to -face versus fully automated role -plays. Computer Assisted Language 

Learning , 37 (1 –2), 149 –178. https://doi.org/10.1080/09588221.2022.2032184 

Toffoli, D., Sockett, G., & Kusyk, M. (Eds.). (2023). Language learning and leisure: Informal language 

learning in the digital age (Vol. 66). Walter de Gruyter. https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110752441 

Valenzuela, A., Puntoni, S., Hoffman, D., Castelo, N., De Freitas, J., Dietvorst, B., Hildebrand, C., Huh, 

Y. E., Meyer, R., & Sweeney, M. E. (2024). How artificial intelligence constrains the human 

experience. Journal of the Association for Consumer Research , 9(3), 241 –256. 

https://www.journals.uchicago.edu/doi/pdf/10.1086/730709 

Vistorte, A. O. R., Deroncele -Acosta, A., Ayala, J. L. M., Barrasa, A., López -Granero, C., & Martí -

González, M. (2024). Integrating artificial intelligence to assess emotions in learning environments: A 

systematic literature review. Frontiers in Psychology , 15 , 1387089. 

https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2024.1387089 

Wang, X., & Hui, L. (2024). Buoyancy and engagement in online English learning: The mediating roles 

and complex interactions of anxiety, enjoyment, and boredom. System , 125 , 103418. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.system.2024.103418 

Wee, L. (2024). Automation in Communication: The Ideological Implications of Language Machines (1st 

ed.). Routledge. https://doi.org/10.4324/9781003467922 

Wharton, T., & De Saussure, L. (2023). Pragmatics and emotion . Cambridge University Press. 

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108869867 

Wilson, D., & Sperber, D. (2006). Relevance theory. In L. R. Horn, & G. Ward (Eds.), The handbook of 

pragmatics (pp.606 –632). Blackwell. https://doi.org/10.1002/9780470756959.ch27 

Wu, T. -T., Hapsari, I. P., & Huang, Y. -M. (2025). Effects of incorporating AI chatbots into think –pair –

share activities on EFL speaking anxiety, language enjoyment, and speaking performance. Computer 

Assisted Language Learning , 1 –39. https://doi.org/10.1080/09588221.2025.2478271 

Wu, X., Li, R., & Gwendoline Quek, C. L. (2025). When GenAI chatbots meet self -determination: 

Unpacking Chinese EFL learners’ engagement in chatbot -assisted language learning. Interactive 

Learning Environments , 1 –21. https://doi.org/10.1080/10494820.2025.2538756 

Xu, G., Yu, A., & Liu, L. (2025). A meta -analysis examining AI -assisted L2 learning. International 

Review of Applied Linguistics in Language Teaching , (0). https://doi.org/10.1515/iral -2024 -0213 

Yang, W., & Lin, C. (2025). Translanguaging with generative AI in EFL writing: Students’ practices and 

perceptions. Journal of Second Language Writing , 67 , 101181. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jslw.2025.101181 

Yanzhou, S. (2025). Translanguaging and AI synergy in multilingual EFL classrooms. Research Studies 

in English Language Teaching and Learning, 3 (5), 531 –549. https://doi.org/10.62583/rseltl.v3i5.113 

Yu, H., Peng, H., & Lowie, W. M. (2022). Dynamics of Language Learning Motivation and Emotions: A 

Parallel -Process Growth Mixture Modeling Approach. Frontiers in Psychology , 13 , 899400. 

https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2022.899400 22 Language Learning & Technology 

Zhang, C., Meng, Y., & Ma, X. (2024). Artificial intelligence in EFL speaking: Impact on enjoyment, 

anxiety, and willingness to communicate. System , 121 , 103259. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.system.2024.103259 

Zheng, Y. -B., Zhou, Y. -X., Chen, X. -D., & Ye, X. -D. (2025). The influence of large language models as 

collaborative dialogue partners on EFL English oral proficiency and foreign language anxiety. 

Computer Assisted Language Learning , 1 –27. https://doi.org/10.1080/09588221.2025.2453191