Title: The Aftermath of DrawEduMath: Vision Language Models Underperform with Struggling Students and Misdiagnose Errors

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.00925v1

Published Time: Tue, 03 Mar 2026 02:26:30 GMT

Number of Pages: 15

Markdown Content:
# The Aftermath of DrawEduMath: Vision Language Models Underperform with Struggling Students and Misdiagnose Errors 

## Li Lucy △ Albert Zhang + Nathan Anderson ÷ Ryan Knight + Kyle Lo □△△University of Washington +Insource Services ÷Worcester Polytechnic Institute 

> □

## Allen Institute for AI 

## lucy3li@cs.washington.edu kylel@allenai.org 

## Abstract 

Effective mathematics education requires iden-tifying and responding to students’ mistakes. For AI to support pedagogical applications, models must perform well across different lev-els of student proficiency. Our work provides an extensive, year-long snapshot of how 11 vision-language models (VLMs) perform on DrawEduMath, a QA benchmark involving real students’ handwritten, hand-drawn responses to math problems. We find that models’ weak-nesses concentrate on a core component of math education: student error. All evaluated VLMs underperform when describing work from students who require more pedagogical help, and across all QA, they struggle the most on questions related to assessing student error. Thus, while VLMs may be optimized to be math problem solving experts, our results sug-gest that they require alternative development incentives to adequately support educational use cases. 

## 1 Introduction 

The use of vision language models (VLMs) in ed-ucation has received increasing attention in both academic research (Küchemann et al., 2025; Lee et al., 2025b) and commercial AI products. Ex-amples of the latter include Google Classroom with Gemini integration, 1 and Khan Academy’s AI tutor Khanmigo, 2 powered by OpenAI mod-els. However, the integration of these models into tutoring and classroom settings often lacks trans-parent, open, and realistic evaluation. With this gap in mind, we previously released DrawEduMath (Figure 1), a dataset consisting of 2,030 teacher-annotated images of real students’ hand-drawn re-sponses to K-12 math problems (Baral et al., 2025). In contrast to other multimodal math understanding 

> 1https://blog.google/outreach-initiatives/ education/classroom-ai-features/
> 2https://www.khanmigo.ai/

or problem solving benchmarks (Alshammari et al., 2026), DrawEduMath involves noisy, naturalistic data pulled from an online learning platform (Fig-ure 1). In the year since its release, we continuously updated the benchmark’s leaderboard 3 with newer models. Our paper offers a snapshot of how 11 VLMs have performed on DrawEduMath in the year after its release (Figure 2). We surface two key findings: 

F1 : VLMs are worse at describing the contents of student work that contains math errors than student work without errors. 

F2 : VLMs still struggle the most on question types related to assessing students’ correctness. These findings suggest that VLMs underperform with students who need additional pedagogical sup-port ( F1 ), and they also fail to appropriately iden-tify cases when support is needed ( F2 ). To investigate these patterns further, we conduct five analyses in §4-§8 targeting factors that may re-late to model performance. Our experiments show that the performance gap in F1 persists even when controlling for problem (§4) and when image noise is reduced (§5). In addition, a possible explanation for F1 is that VLMs expect mathematically correct input images. Indeed, we find that some models’ wrongly predicted answers for erroneous student work are similar to gold answers for non-erroneous student work (§6). We also find that models do improve in assessing student correctness ( F2 ) when provided gold nat-ural language descriptions of student work (§7). However, their performance on these questions with extra textual support still lags behind their out-of-the-box performance on other question types. Finally, though models seemingly perform better on binary correctness questions (e.g. “ Does the student do ___ correctly? ”) than open-ended ones 

> 3https://drawedumath.org/

1   

> arXiv:2603.00925v1 [cs.CL] 1 Mar 2026 Figure 1: On the left is a math problem, where students are asked to draw x < 5/2on a number line. The right side shows two example student responses that differ in correctness. DrawEduMath pairs each math problem with one student response, and prompts VLMs to answer questions about the student response.
> Figure 2: VLMs consistently perform worse on answering DrawEduMath benchmark questions pertaining to erroneous student responses. Performance on non-erroneous student responses ( ⃝) is labeled with specific VLMs’ names; that same model’s performance on erroneous student responses is directly below ( □). Error bars are 95% CI.

(e.g. “ What errors does the student make in their response? ”), some VLMs’ performance can some-times be barely better than chance (§8). Altogether, our in-depth error analysis of VLMs’ performance on real student math responses pro-vides a clearer picture of their weaknesses in sup-porting K-12 math education. We release data and scripts for reproducing our findings. 4

## 2 Background & Related Work 

Multimodal math benchmarks. Mathematical content, rich with diagrams, is ripe for evaluating models’ multimodal abilities. Thus, many vision-language benchmark creation efforts have targeted math (Alshammari et al., 2026; Zhang et al., 2024; Lu et al., 2024; Yan et al., 2025). Educational settings offer additional challenges, where VLMs may be assessed on their abilities to make higher-level pedagogical inferences and handle handwrit-ten, hand-drawn content (Parsaeifard et al., 2025; 

> 4https://github.com/lucy3/aftermath_ drawedumath

Latif et al., 2025; Nath et al., 2025; Nguyen et al., 2025). For example, MathCog asks models to diag-nose students’ cognitive skills using binary yes/no questions and a digitally handwritten dataset (Jin et al., 2025). Within this landscape of prior work, DrawEduMath remains a significant evaluation re-source, given its diversity of image and question types, its use of noisy, real student work, and its inclusion of experienced teacher annotations (Baral et al., 2025). 

AI & student error. Student mistakes and mis-conceptions have long been a focal point in educa-tion research (Smith III et al., 1994; Radatz, 1979; Borasi, 1994; Metcalfe, 2017). With increased at-tention towards AI as tutors and teaching assistants, research has focused on models’ abilities to iden-tify student error (Srivatsa et al., 2025; Kochmar et al., 2025; Daheim et al., 2024), reason about pat-terned misconceptions (Rittle-Johnson et al., 2025; Ross and Andreas, 2025), correct errors (Mita et al., 2024), and provide feedback (Kaliisa et al., 2026; Botelho et al., 2023; Stahl et al., 2024). There is 2some research around model robustness to user er-ror, but much of it focuses on linguistic errors in prompts (Gan et al., 2024; Chatterjee et al., 2024). There is little work on how math errors impact model performance: one example is Daheim et al. (2024), who show that language models are worse at verifying the correctness of erroneous student math than non-erroneous math. Our work reaches a similar conclusion across more QA types and with multimodal data, though our results around models’ correctness & error assessments paint a less straightforward picture (§8). 

Risks of AI in education. The field of AI & edu-cation could be considered a form of AI for “social good” (Cowls et al., 2021), driven by goals that counter AI’s negative impacts on human skill for-mation and cognitive thinking (Bastani et al., 2025; Klimova and Pikhart, 2025; Shen and Tamkin, 2026; Lee et al., 2025a). However, though its end-goals may be optimistically framed, AI in edu-cation is not without risk (Blodgett and Madaio, 2021; Holstein and Doroudi, 2021). Our work is aligned with literature that investigates how AI may disparately impact different student popula-tions (Schaller et al., 2024; Capraro et al., 2024; Hadar Shoval, 2025); our distinct approach is that we group student inputs based on demonstrated math proficiency. 

## 3 Evaluating VLMs with DrawEduMath 

3.1 Data 

DrawEduMath is an English-language dataset of 2,030 images of students’ handwritten responses to K-12 math problems (Baral et al., 2025). Im-ages are provided by the online learning platform ASSISTments and contain math problems drawn from open educational resources (Heffernan and Heffernan, 2014; Feng et al., 2025). Each image includes a math problem on the left and a student’s response on the right, and is accompanied by three types of data: 1. Free-form captions (2.0k+) from teachers describing each student response image. 2. Synthetic QA pairs (44.4k+), produced by Claude-3.5 Sonnet and GPT-4o reformatting facets of teachers’ captions into QA, e.g. On the left-hand side of the image, the student wrote the word syrup → What word did the student write on the left-hand side of the im-age? Syrup. 

3. Teacher-written QA pairs (11.6k+). Teach-ers wrote a set of shared questions for each math problem, followed by answers for each student response to each problem. Teachers answered two additional generic questions, 

What errors does the student make in their response? and What strategy does the student use to solve the problem? across all problems and student responses. DrawEduMath includes a taxonomy of seven question types. In our analysis, we simplify this taxonomy into three types: image creation and medium (12.3%), correctness & errors (8.5%), and 

content description (79.2%). The first two match the benchmark’s original taxonomy, while the third question type is an aggregation of all other question types, ranging from the student’s problem solving strategy to the meaning, positioning, and frequency of drawn/written elements. We aggregate these question types in our main text, because our main findings generalize across more fine-grained types (Appendix A). The original DrawEduMath paper includes additional dataset statistics and QA exam-ples (Baral et al., 2025). 

3.2 Evaluation Setup Scoring metric. Baral et al. (2025) used Mixtral 8x22B to judge the similarity of VLMs’ generated answers to gold answers on a scale of 1 ( quite dif-ferent answers ) - 4 ( basically the same ), and then binarized these ratings when computing models’ accuracy. As LMs update over time, older ones like Mixtral 8x22B become deprecated in model API services. Thus, all evaluation in our work uses an updated LLM judge. We take the majority vote from three judges: Claude Sonnet 4.5, Gemini 2.5 Pro, and GPT-4o. 5 Our updated judge achieves sim-ilar correlation (Spearman ρ = 0.808) with the same set of human judgements as Baral et al. (2025)’s original judge ( ρ = 0.801). We compute and re-port binarized model accuracies; 1-2 are counted as incorrect, and 3-4 are correct. 

Models. We evaluate 11 VLMs released in 2025 on DrawEduMath. Models span four developers: Open AI (GPT-4.1, GPT-4.5 Preview, o4-mini, GPT-5), Anthropic (Claude Sonnet 3.7, Claude Sonnet 4, Claude Sonnet 4.5), Google (Gemini 2.0 Flash, Gemini 2.5 Pro, Gemini 2.5 Pro Preview,), 

> 5Though GPT-4o is an older model, it has higher individual correlation with human annotations than the two newer models. So, we included it in our set of judges.

3Figure 3: Content description QA consistently drives the gap in VLM performance between student responses that contain errors versus those that do not. Appendix A includes additional VLMs that expand this finding. 

and Meta AI (Llama 4 Scout). Though our main findings F1 & F2 pertain to all of these models, the analyses in §5-§8 focus on four representative mod-els: Gemini 2.5 Pro, Claude Sonnet 4.5, GPT-5, and Llama 4 Scout. 

Labeling student error. To categorize whether students’ math responses contain an error or not, we use teachers’ answers to the question, What errors does the student make in their response? 

We ask GPT-5-mini to interpret each open-ended answer and classify it as yes , as in, the teacher describes some error, or no , for when teachers’ answers are variations of There is no error or The student did not make an error (Appendix B.1). We validate this LM annotator on a manually checked random sample of 200 examples (F1 = 0.984). 

3.3 Main Findings 

On average, models tend to perform worse when the student response contains an error (Figure 2). We find that this pattern is mostly driven by con-tent description QA ( F1 , Figure 3). In addition, a weakness reported by Baral et al. (2025) in older VLMs persists in newer ones: questions related to students’ correctness and errors are still the most difficult ( F2 ). In the next few sections, we dive into five factors that we hypothesize to relate to these findings: problem effects (§4), image noise (§5), problem response defaults (§6), visual understand-ing bottlenecks (§7), and question open-endedness (§8).             

> Model β1
> Gemini 2.0 Flash 0.0944*** Gemini 2.5 Pro Preview 0.0888*** Gemini 2.5 Pro 0.0889*** GPT-4.1 0.0865*** GPT-4.5 preview 0.0874*** o4-mini 0.0612*** GPT-5 0.0585*** Claude Sonnet 3.7 0.0922*** Claude Sonnet 4 0.0816*** Claude Sonnet 4.5 0.0842*** Llama 4 Scout 0.1013***

Table 1: Estimated effects of student correctness ( β1)on VLMs’ accuracy on content description QA, where all p < 1.0−12 .

## 4 Models underperform on erroneous student responses even when controlling for problem 

One possibility is that the model performance gap observed by F1 is actually not affected by the pres-ence or absence of student error, but rather by some math problems being more difficult for VLMs to understand. DrawEduMath contains 188 unique math problems targeting concepts ranging from ge-ometry to fractions. These problems span multiple grade levels, and on average, each problem has 12.64 student responses (Baral et al., 2025). Here, we show that the effect of student error on VLMs’ content description QA performance is statistically significant even when controlling for problem. We estimate an ordinary least squares regression with problem fixed effects: 

yij = β0 + β1(sij ) + uj + ϵij 

In the equation above, yij is the average score a model has across content description QA for a stu-dent response i and problem j, uj is a fixed effect for each problem, and ϵij is the residual. If the student response is correct, sij = 1, otherwise sij =0. Table 1 presents β1 values across VLMs. These values show that even after controlling for prob-lem, non-erroneous student responses significantly correspond with higher VLM performance. 

## 5 Models’ performance gaps are not strongly impacted by image noise 

Another possible explanation for F1 is that students who make math errors may simply submit noisier images. Students on ASSISTments may submit their answers by drawing digitally, or by upload-ing photographs of pen & paper work, which may 4Figure 4: An example of how a student response im-age (top) is transformed and cleaned up by our digital redrawing process (bottom). This student uses a place value chart to show how digit values change for 345 after division by 100. 

include smudges and blur. In this section, we ask, does the model performance gap described by F1 

remain even when students’ responses are redrawn on a digital canvas in a standardized manner? 

5.1 Experimental Setup 

Redrawing images is a time-intensive process, re-quiring careful interpretation of each math problem and the intent of the original student response. So, for this experiment, we stratify sample one erro-neous student response and one correct response from each problem, yielding 336 images in to-tal. Though this sample is small, it retains sta-tistically significant gaps in VLM performance on content description QA between erroneous and non-erroneous student response images (Table 2). To encourage consistency, the lead author redrew all sampled student responses using a digital pen and the drawing application Procreate. This redraw-ing author retained students’ original positioning of content, and consulted teachers’ captions of images to navigate ambiguity and avoid faulty interpreta-tion of problems and student responses. If needed, the author recreated elements such as graph pa-per grids and typed content in Figma. Figure 4 provides an illustrative example of how redrawing transforms students’ responses. 

5.2 Results 

On redrawn images, VLMs’ performance shift in the expected direction, where scores generally im-prove with less image noise (Figure 5). Though requesting students to only submit born-digital con-tent may make their work more interpretable for AI, not all classrooms have resources and policies that make such standardization feasible. In addition, pen-and-paper work remains vital, with studies              

> Figure 5: Models’ performance for content description QA generally improves after images are redrawn. Error bars are 95% CI.
> Model Original Images Redrawn Images
> Gemini 2.5 Pro -0.089*** -0.096*** Claude Sonnet 4.5 -0.100*** -0.058** GPT-5 -0.055** -0.043** Llama 4 Scout -0.092*** -0.073***
> Table 2: Differences in average scores on content de-scription QA between erroneous and non-erroneous student images persist after redrawing. ** p < 0.01 ,*** p < 0.001 .

showing that this traditional mode of learning can sometimes allow students to surpass their digital-only peers (Mueller and Oppenheimer, 2014; Alta-mura et al., 2025; Anthony et al., 2007; Umejima et al., 2021). Thus, one implication of Figure 5 is that the integration of VLMs in education may disparately impact analog and digital learners. Importantly, we also find that models’ perfor-mance gap between erroneous and non-erroneous student images remains in redrawn images (Ta-ble 2). This result complements that of §4, by further isolating student error as a weak point in the use of VLMs in educational settings. Thus, mitigation efforts around F1 should focus on im-proving models’ understanding of erroneous math-ematical content, across all levels of image noise and medium types. 

## 6 Models default to assuming error-free math solutions 

Why might erroneous student images be so chal-lenging for VLMs? During a manual examination 5Figure 6: Illustrative examples of the phenomenon where models predict answers for erroneous student responses that match true answers for non-erroneous students. 

of VLMs’ QA errors, we observed that models sometimes produce plausible, though wrong, an-swers to benchmark questions, especially consid-ering the context of the provided math problem (Figure 6). This observation suggests a possible ex-planation for F1 : VLMs perform better on content description QA for error-free student responses, be-cause models default to assuming error-free math solutions. 

6.1 Analysis Setup 

To quantify our observation using existing DrawE-duMath annotations, we filter for content descrip-tion QA shared across different student response images for the same math problem. Then, for each incorrect model answer to questions pertain-ing to erroneous student responses, we compare the model’s answer against true answers for non-erroneous student responses, and see whether the model’s incorrect answer matches the majority of these true ones. We compare model answers us-ing the ensemble LM judge from §3.2. We only consider cases where we have at least two non-erroneous student response images associated with the given question, to ensure that we have sufficient signal of correct student behavior. 

6.2 Results 

Across four representative VLMs, incorrect model responses for erroneous student responses some-times do match non-erroneous student solutions, with percentages ranging from 29% of content de-scription QA mistakes for Gemini 2.5 Pro to 35%      

> Model %
> Gemini 2.5 Pro 0.2923 Claude Sonnet 4.5 0.3519 GPT-5 0.3125 Llama 4 Scout 0.3060
> Table 3: The percentage of times for which an incorrect model answer for a content description question and erroneous student image matched the majority (> 50%) of true answers for non-erroneous student images.

for Claude Sonnet 4.5 (Table 3). So, a sizable por-tion of benchmark answers may be inferrable based on a math problem and a typical correct solution. There are many more ways a student response can be wrong than it can be correct, and so benchmark QA corresponding to correct student solutions nav-igate a narrower space of plausible possibilities. Qualitatively, we observe that models especially tend to predict incorrect answers that match cor-rect problem solutions when benchmark questions involve false presuppositions. Figure 6 illustrates an example; there, the wording of the top teacher-written question assumes that the student has drawn any array at all. Teacher-written questions in DrawEduMath are those that teachers would like VLMs to answer across all student responses to a problem, mimicking potential uses of VLMs for learning analytics. Models’ susceptibility to false premises or suppositions is well-documented in prior work (e.g. Yu et al., 2023; Srikanth et al., 2024), and our work illustrates a consequence of this weakness for education-related applications. Generally, language models are developed to be good math problem solvers. Math solving bench-marks are continuously emphasized in leaderboards and commercial LM releases (Cobbe et al., 2021; Hendrycks et al., 2021; Google DeepMind, 2025). To encourage mathematically correct outputs and hill-climb on these benchmarks, models are mostly exposed to “high quality”, correct math content during training (Mahabadi et al., 2025; Paster et al., 2024). The challenge of understanding, but not generating faulty content has received attention in other domains. For example, toxicity is another case of an understanding vs. generation tradeoff; we want models that can detect, address, and under-stand toxic content, without generating it (Longpre et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2025). Our findings sug-gest that education is another domain where the application of alternative training methods on erro-neous data, such as Wang et al. (2025), could be 6applicable. 

## 7 Textual support can improve models’ correctness assessments to some extent 

DrawEduMath QA range from low-level content description (e.g. “ How many triangles did the stu-dent draw? ”) to higher-level correctness judge-ments. Now, we move on from examining F1 ,which focuses on content description QA, to dig-ging deeper into F2 , which pertains to correctness & errors QA. Earlier, we saw that the latter remain difficult even after images are digitally cleaned up (Figure 5). Perhaps, image understanding is a bot-tleneck for models answering these more reasoning-intensive questions. To what extent can models im-prove their assessment of student error when given textual descriptions of student work? 

7.1 Experimental Setup 

As mentioned in §3.1, DrawEduMath includes teacher-written, gold captions of students’ response images. Baral et al. (2025) used these captions to synthetically generate a subset of the QA pairs in the benchmark. If a caption produces synthetic QA that fall in the correctness & error question category, we exclude that image from the current analysis to avoid input-output contamination. 6 We append to each DrawEduMath input prompt these gold captions (prompt in Appendix C.1), and re-evaluate models’ performance on correctness & er-ror QA. In addition, we also evaluate a setup where we ask models to generate their own descriptions of students’ responses, and provide those captions in place of gold ones. 

7.2 Results 

Results are in the expected direction, in that VLM performance on correctness & errors QA improves with natural language support (Figure 7). However, this improved performance on correctness & errors QA with captions still lags behind VLMs’ caption-less performance in all other question categories for the same set of images. So, it is challenging for VLMs to make higher-level inferences useful for pedagogy even with gold textual support. A fully automatic two step caption-then-answer-QA process is a form of test-time scaling. We find that providing models their own generated captions  

> 6We remove 262 images out of a total of 2,030. We considered editing captions rather than remove images, but correctness-related content was sometimes integrated with other caption content and would require intensive rewriting.
> Figure 7: Model performance on correctness & error (C&E) QA, with and without natural language descrip-tion (NLD) support. We evaluate with a subset of input images and captions as described in §7.1. Error bars are 95% CI.

of images can get models close to, but not match, their performance with teacher-written gold cap-tions (Figure 7). 

## 8 Binary judgements of student correctness remain challenging 

Open-ended questions are inherently more difficult than binary (e.g. yes/no) questions, as the latter is more guessable. Correctness & errors QA ( F2 ) in DrawEduMath provide a natural testbed for com-paring open-ended questions (“ What errors does the student make in their response? ”) and binary questions that assess whether some aspect of a stu-dent’s response is correct/incorrect. 

8.1 Analysis Setup 

Our analysis splits correctness & error QA into the following three subcategories: • Generic questions (45.0%). This is the open-ended question that DrawEduMath includes for all student images: “ What errors does the student make in their response? ”• Binary assessments of specific solution com-ponents (50.4%), e.g. “ Does the student put the decimal in the correct place in the prod-uct? ”• Other questions (4.5%), which mostly pertain to the nature of a student’s error, e.g. “ What incorrect product did the student calculate for 667 times 5? ”We use GPT-5-mini as an annotator to label whether non-generic questions are binary or 7Figure 8: VLMs’ performance on the two main subtypes of correctness & error QA, disaggregated by whether a student response is overall correct ( generic ) or correct based on specific aspect of their solution ( binary ). Er-ror bars are 95% CI. 

other (prompt in Appendix B.2). We validate this LM annotator on a manually labeled random sample of 200 unique questions (F1 = 0.975). We focus on binary and generic in the main text; Ap-pendix D includes some results involving other .Do models tend to predict that students make er-rors when they don’t, or do they tend to overlook er-rors instead? For binary QA, we use GPT-5-mini to annotate whether questions and gold answers in-dicate that student is correct or incorrect (prompt in Appendix B.3). For example, for the ground truth binary QA pair “ Q: Is there an error in the way that the number line has been drawn? A: Yes ”, the LM annotator would output that the student is incorrect .We validate this LM annotator on a sample of 200 manually annotated random examples (F1 = 0.925). In total, the LM annotator labels 59.01% of 2,274 binary QA as cases where the specified aspect of the student’s response is correct, and the rest as ones where the specified aspect is incorrect. We also examine model performance on 

generic QA, disaggregated by whether the stu-dent’s response is overall incorrect or correct. In DrawEduMath, successfully answering this ques-tion for correct students requires simply stating that there is no error, while for models to score well for erroneous students, they must also faithfully de-scribe error specifics. 

8.2 Results 

Figure 8 shows that performance patterns on cor-rectness & error QA, in relation to student cor-rectness, generally and specifically, tend to be id-iosyncratic. Some models tend to overreport er-rors being present, with lower scores on student images with no error . Others struggle to detect and, in the case of generic , articulate errors that are present, with lower scores on student images with error . Model behavior patterns are not shared across model versions from the same family or de-veloper. Figure 8 also indicates that some VLMs’ 

binary QA scores hover closely around a random baseline of 0.5. Overall, assessing student error is incredibly challenging for VLMs, even though a substantial proportion of correctness & error QA in DrawEduMath have high by-chance floor for performance. 

## 9 Conclusion 

Despite increasing attention towards the use of mul-timodal AI in education, our evaluation of 11 mod-els released in 2025 demonstrates that their appli-cation on real student data remains challenging. Our findings suggest that erroneous student work is inherently more difficult for VLMs than correct student work ( F1 ). VLM training and evaluation pipelines that favor correct mathematical content are at tension with the promise of AI for education, where incorrect math requires extra emphasis and attention. We also show that QA involving assess-ments of student correctness are particularly tricky (F2 ), across both text and image inputs, and across open-ended and binary question forms. Though this present paper presents a detailed er-ror analysis of VLMs’ performance on one vision-language K-12 math benchmark, our evaluation ap-proach can be re-applied to other education-related benchmarks as well. That is, the evaluation of AI in education should be disaggregated in a man-ner that pinpoints whether models can actually dis-cern when a student may need pedagogical support (F2 ), and whether they equitably serve students across different levels of proficiency ( F1 ). Without a careful eye on the latter, models’ capabilities may be overstated, and rushed integration into class-rooms may exacerbate existing academic achieve-ment gaps. 8Limitations 

Scope and data representativeness. Our study focuses on a single English benchmark, which in-volves student response images drawn from one online learning platform, ASSISTments. Thus, our findings may not map directly onto other languages and learning contexts. Based on school-level data provided by ASSISTments, we estimate that 85% of images come from Title I schools, which are public schools in the U.S. that receive federal fund-ing to support low-income students. ASSISTments partners with teachers and schools located across multiple location types (e.g. rural, suburban, town, city) and regions (e.g. West Coast, Midwest, East Coast, South), but self-selection is at play when it comes to which teachers, schools, and districts use the platform. DrawEduMath also contains ques-tions that represent what was salient to Teaching Lab’s teacher annotators (Baral et al., 2025); it is not comprehensive of all of the ways in which edu-cators may interpret and support student learning. Still, our high-level evaluation approach can be re-applied to other benchmarks and contexts, be-cause transparency around the impact of student error on model performance is relevant to nearly all education-related settings. 

Data constraints. Some of our experiments and analyses navigate practical, data-related constraints. For example, our image redrawing experiment in §5 uses a small sample rather than the full dataset, since redrawing is a time-intensive process. Our other analyses rely on pre-existing teacher annota-tions and data present in DrawEdumath. For ex-ample, in §7, we removed some images from our analysis because their captions contained correct-ness & error information, because models’ perfor-mance with textual support on those images would be inflated. In addition, the content description QA under consideration for the results shown in Table 3 are only questions shared across multiple student images for a problem, for which we could gather sufficient signal for what correct student re-sponse behavior should be. So, our results in that section (§6) primarily serve to illustrate one pos-sible explanation for models’ performance, and is not comprehensive of all of DrawEduMath. 

## Ethical Considerations 

Education is a high-stakes setting for VLM use and deployment. The intermixing of AI and education involves delegating pedagogy to automated sys-tems, impacting vulnerable underage populations, with possible life-long downstream effects related to economic mobility. Though there is optimism around AI’s ability to support education (Demszky et al., 2025), there should also be caution that it does not exacerbate existing inequities or introduce new ones (Winters et al., 2020; Harvey et al., 2024). We acknowledge that our work focuses primarily on technical harms measurable from model out-puts, and does not capture broader harms that may emerge via interaction of AI with students, teach-ers, and school systems (Harvey et al., 2025). In addition, AI research often involves a deployment-first mentality, where deployment may occur before a system has been deemed functional or necessary (Raji et al., 2022). Our work advocates for robust evaluation and auditing of AI prior to deployment (Raji et al., 2020), and accountability behind claims around model functionality and its social benefits (Kou et al., 2025; Wang et al., 2024). 

## Acknowledgments 

We are grateful for valuable feedback from Douglas Jaffe, who encouraged us to dig further into the impact of student error on model performance. We are also grateful for data-related support from Sami Baral, Neil Heffernan, and Cristina Heffernan. Our work is funded by the Gates Foundation. 

## References          

> Shaden Alshammari, Kevin Wen, Abrar Zainal, Mark Hamilton, Navid Safaei, Sultan Albarakati, William T. Freeman, and Antonio Torralba. 2026. MathNet: A global multimodal benchmark for math-ematical reasoning and retrieval. In The Fourteenth International Conference on Learning Representa-tions .Lidia Altamura, Cristina Vargas, and Ladislao Salmerón. 2025. Do new forms of reading pay off? A meta-analysis on the relationship between leisure digital reading habits and text comprehension. Review of Educational Research , 95(1):53–88. Lisa Anthony, Jie Yang, and Kenneth R. Koedinger. 2007. Benefits of handwritten input for students learning algebra equation solving. In Proceedings of the 2007 Conference on Artificial Intelligence in Edu-cation: Building Technology Rich Learning Contexts That Work , page 521–523, NLD. IOS Press. Sami Baral, Li Lucy, Ryan Knight, Alice Ng, Luca Sol-daini, Neil Heffernan, and Kyle Lo. 2025. DrawE-duMath: Evaluating vision language models with

9expert-annotated students’ hand-drawn math images. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference of the Na-tions of the Americas Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-nologies (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 6902–6920, Albuquerque, New Mexico. Association for Compu-tational Linguistics. Hamsa Bastani, Osbert Bastani, Alp Sungu, Haosen Ge, Özge Kabakcı, and Rei Mariman. 2025. Gen-erative AI without guardrails can harm learning: Evidence from high school mathematics. Pro-ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences ,122(26):e2422633122. Su Lin Blodgett and Michael Madaio. 2021. Risks of AI foundation models in education. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.10024 .Raffaella Borasi. 1994. Capitalizing on errors as “springboards for inquiry”: A teaching experiment. 

Journal for Research in Mathematics Education ,25(2):166–208. Anthony Botelho, Sami Baral, John A. Erickson, Priyanka Benachamardi, and Neil T. Heffernan. 2023. Leveraging natural language processing to support automated assessment and feedback for student open responses in mathematics. Journal of Computer As-sisted Learning , 39(3):823–840. Valerio Capraro, Austin Lentsch, Daron Acemoglu, Selin Akgun, Aisel Akhmedova, Ennio Bilancini, Jean-François Bonnefon, Pablo Brañas-Garza, Luigi Butera, Karen M Douglas, and 1 others. 2024. The impact of generative artificial intelligence on so-cioeconomic inequalities and policy making. PNAS nexus , 3(6):pgae191. Anwoy Chatterjee, H S V N S Kowndinya Renduchin-tala, Sumit Bhatia, and Tanmoy Chakraborty. 2024. POSIX: A prompt sensitivity index for large language models. In Findings of the Association for Compu-tational Linguistics: EMNLP 2024 , pages 14550– 14565, Miami, Florida, USA. Association for Com-putational Linguistics. Karl Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Mohammad Bavarian, Mark Chen, Heewoo Jun, Lukasz Kaiser, Matthias Plappert, Jerry Tworek, Jacob Hilton, Reiichiro Nakano, Christopher Hesse, and John Schulman. 2021. Training verifiers to solve math word prob-lems. Preprint , arXiv:2110.14168. Josh Cowls, Andreas Tsamados, Mariarosaria Taddeo, and Luciano Floridi. 2021. A definition, benchmark and database of AI for social good initiatives. Nature Machine Intelligence , 3(2):111–115. Nico Daheim, Jakub Macina, Manu Kapur, Iryna Gurevych, and Mrinmaya Sachan. 2024. Stepwise verification and remediation of student reasoning er-rors with large language model tutors. In Proceed-ings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 8386–8411, Miami, Florida, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics. Dorottya Demszky, Jing Liu, Heather C. Hill, Shyamoli Sanghi, and Ariel Chung. 2025. Automated feed-back improves teachers’ questioning quality in brick-and-mortar classrooms: Opportunities for further en-hancement. Computers & Education , 227:105183. Mingyu Feng, Linlin Li, Chunwei Huang, Natalie Brezack, and Kim Luttgen. 2025. Empowering teach-ers with technology: A national study on a formative assessment platform. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence in Education , pages 119–126. Springer. Esther Gan, Yiran Zhao, Liying Cheng, Mao Yancan, Anirudh Goyal, Kenji Kawaguchi, Min-Yen Kan, and Michael Shieh. 2024. Reasoning robustness of LLMs to adversarial typographical errors. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 10449–10459, Miami, Florida, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics. Google DeepMind. 2025. Gemini 3 Pro model card. Dorit Hadar Shoval. 2025. Artificial intelligence in higher education: Bridging or widening the gap for diverse student populations? Education Sciences ,15(5). Emma Harvey, Allison Koenecke, and Rene F Kizilcec. 2024. Towards an educator-centered method for mea-suring bias in large language model-based chatbot tutors. In AI for Education: Bridging Innovation and Responsibility at the 38th AAAI Annual Conference on AI .Emma Harvey, Allison Koenecke, and Rene F. Kizil-cec. 2025. "Don’t forget the teachers": Towards an educator-centered understanding of harms from large language models in education. In Proceedings of the 2025 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , CHI ’25, New York, NY, USA. Association for Computing Machinery. Neil T Heffernan and Cristina Lindquist Heffernan. 2014. The ASSISTments ecosystem: Building a platform that brings scientists and teachers together for minimally invasive research on human learning and teaching. International Journal of Artificial In-telligence in Education , 24(4):470–497. Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Saurav Kadavath, Akul Arora, Steven Basart, Eric Tang, Dawn Song, and Jacob Steinhardt. 2021. Measuring mathematical problem solving with the MATH dataset. In Thirty-fifth Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track (Round 2) .Kenneth Holstein and Shayan Doroudi. 2021. Equity and artificial intelligence in education: Will "AIEd" amplify or alleviate inequities in education? Preprint ,arXiv:2104.12920. Hyoungwook Jin, Yoonsu Kim, Dongyun Jung, Seungju Kim, Kiyoon Choi, Jinho Son, and Juho Kim. 2025. Investigating large language models in diagnosing 

10 students’ cognitive skills in math problem-solving. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.00843 .Rogers Kaliisa, Kamila Misiejuk, Sonsoles López-Pernas, and Mohammed Saqr. 2026. How does ar-tificial intelligence compare to human feedback? a meta-analysis of performance, feedback perception, and learning dispositions. Educational Psychology ,46(1):80–111. Blanka Klimova and Marcel Pikhart. 2025. Exploring the effects of artificial intelligence on student and academic well-being in higher education: A mini-review. Frontiers in Psychology , 16:1498132. Ekaterina Kochmar, Kaushal Maurya, Kseniia Petukhova, KV Aditya Srivatsa, Anaïs Tack, and Justin Vasselli. 2025. Findings of the BEA 2025 shared task on pedagogical ability assessment of AI-powered tutors. In Proceedings of the 20th Workshop on Innovative Use of NLP for Building Educational Applications (BEA 2025) , pages 1011–1033, Vienna, Austria. Association for Computational Linguistics. Tianqi Kou, Dana Calacci, and Cindy Lin. 2025. Dead zone of accountability: Why social claims in machine learning research should be articulated and defended. In Proceedings of the AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society , volume 8, pages 1501–1512. Stefan Küchemann, Karina E Avila, Yavuz Dinc, Chiara Hortmann, Natalia Revenga, Verena Ruf, Niklas Stausberg, Steffen Steinert, Frank Fischer, Martin Fischer, and 1 others. 2025. On opportunities and challenges of large multimodal foundation models in education. npj Science of Learning , 10(1):11. Ehsan Latif, Zirak Khan, and Xiaoming Zhai. 2025. SketchMind: A multi-agent cognitive framework for assessing student-drawn scientific sketches. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.22904 .Hao-Ping (Hank) Lee, Advait Sarkar, Lev Tankele-vitch, Ian Drosos, Sean Rintel, Richard Banks, and Nicholas Wilson. 2025a. The impact of generative ai on critical thinking: Self-reported reductions in cognitive effort and confidence effects from a survey of knowledge workers. In Proceedings of the 2025 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , CHI ’25, New York, NY, USA. Association for Computing Machinery. Jimin Lee, Steven-Shine Chen, and Paul Pu Liang. 2025b. Interactive Sketchpad: A multimodal tutor-ing system for collaborative, visual problem-solving. In Proceedings of the Extended Abstracts of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ,CHI EA ’25, New York, NY, USA. Association for Computing Machinery. Shayne Longpre, Gregory Yauney, Emily Reif, Kather-ine Lee, Adam Roberts, Barret Zoph, Denny Zhou, Jason Wei, Kevin Robinson, David Mimno, and Daphne Ippolito. 2024. A pretrainer’s guide to train-ing data: Measuring the effects of data age, domain coverage, quality, & toxicity. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Hu-man Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Pa-pers) , pages 3245–3276, Mexico City, Mexico. Asso-ciation for Computational Linguistics. Pan Lu, Hritik Bansal, Tony Xia, Jiacheng Liu, Chun-yuan Li, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Hao Cheng, Kai-Wei Chang, Michel Galley, and Jianfeng Gao. 2024. MathVista: Evaluating mathematical reasoning of foundation models in visual contexts. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representa-tions .Rabeeh Karimi Mahabadi, Sanjeev Satheesh, Shrimai Prabhumoye, Mostofa Patwary, Mohammad Shoeybi, and Bryan Catanzaro. 2025. Nemotron-CC-Math: A 133 billion-token-scale high quality math pretraining dataset. Preprint , arXiv:2508.15096. Janet Metcalfe. 2017. Learning from errors. Annual Review of Psychology , 68:465–489. Masato Mita, Keisuke Sakaguchi, Masato Hagiwara, Tomoya Mizumoto, Jun Suzuki, and Kentaro Inui. 2024. Towards automated document revision: Gram-matical error correction, fluency edits, and beyond. In Proceedings of the 19th Workshop on Innovative Use of NLP for Building Educational Applications (BEA 2024) , pages 251–265, Mexico City, Mexico. Association for Computational Linguistics. Pam A. Mueller and Daniel M. Oppenheimer. 2014. The pen is mightier than the keyboard: Advantages of longhand over laptop note taking. Psychological Science , 25(6):1159–1168. PMID: 24760141. Oikantik Nath, Hanani Bathina, Mohammed Safi Ur Rahman Khan, and Mitesh M Khapra. 2025. Can vision-language models evaluate handwritten math? In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 14784–14814, Vienna, Austria. Association for Computational Linguistics. Thu Phuong Nguyen, Duc M. Nguyen, Hyotaek Jeon, Hyunwook Lee, Hyunmin Song, Sungahn Ko, and Taehwan Kim. 2025. VEHME: A vision-language model for evaluating handwritten mathematics ex-pressions. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing ,pages 31793–31813, Suzhou, China. Association for Computational Linguistics. Behnam Parsaeifard, Martin Hlosta, and Per Bergamin. 2025. Automated grading of students’ handwrit-ten graphs: A comparison of meta-learning and vision-large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.03056 .Keiran Paster, Marco Dos Santos, Zhangir Azerbayev, and Jimmy Ba. 2024. OpenWebMath: An open dataset of high-quality mathematical web text. In 

The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations .

11 Hendrik Radatz. 1979. Error analysis in mathematics education. Journal for Research in mathematics Ed-ucation , 10(3):163–172. Inioluwa Deborah Raji, I Elizabeth Kumar, Aaron Horowitz, and Andrew Selbst. 2022. The fallacy of AI functionality. In Proceedings of the 2022 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Trans-parency , pages 959–972. Inioluwa Deborah Raji, Andrew Smart, Rebecca N. White, Margaret Mitchell, Timnit Gebru, Ben Hutchinson, Jamila Smith-Loud, Daniel Theron, and Parker Barnes. 2020. Closing the AI accountability gap: defining an end-to-end framework for internal algorithmic auditing. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Trans-parency , FAT* ’20, page 33–44, New York, NY, USA. Association for Computing Machinery. Bethany Rittle-Johnson, Rebecca Adler, Kelley Durkin, L Burleigh, Jules King, and Scott Crossley. 2025. Detecting math misconceptions: An AI benchmark dataset. In Proceedings of the Artificial Intelligence in Measurement and Education Conference (AIME-Con): Works in Progress , pages 20–24, Wyndham Grand Pittsburgh, Downtown, Pittsburgh, Pennsylva-nia, United States. National Council on Measurement in Education (NCME). Alexis Ross and Jacob Andreas. 2025. Learning to make MISTAKEs: Modeling incorrect student think-ing and key errors. Preprint , arXiv:2510.11502. Nils-Jonathan Schaller, Yuning Ding, Andrea Horbach, Jennifer Meyer, and Thorben Jansen. 2024. Fairness in automated essay scoring: A comparative analy-sis of algorithms on German learner essays from secondary education. In Proceedings of the 19th Workshop on Innovative Use of NLP for Building Ed-ucational Applications (BEA 2024) , pages 210–221, Mexico City, Mexico. Association for Computational Linguistics. Judy Hanwen Shen and Alex Tamkin. 2026. How AI impacts skill formation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.20245 .John P Smith III, Andrea A. diSessa, and Jeremy Roschelle. 1994. Misconceptions reconceived: A constructivist analysis of knowledge in transition. 

Journal of the Learning Sciences , 3(2):115–163. Neha Srikanth, Rupak Sarkar, Heran Mane, Elizabeth Aparicio, Quynh Nguyen, Rachel Rudinger, and Jor-dan Boyd-Graber. 2024. Pregnant questions: The im-portance of pragmatic awareness in maternal health question answering. In Proceedings of the 2024 Con-ference of the North American Chapter of the Asso-ciation for Computational Linguistics: Human Lan-guage Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 7253–7268, Mexico City, Mexico. Association for Computational Linguistics. Kv Aditya Srivatsa, Kaushal Kumar Maurya, and Eka-terina Kochmar. 2025. LLMs cannot spot math er-rors, even when allowed to peek into the solution. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empiri-cal Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 10914–10928, Suzhou, China. Association for Com-putational Linguistics. Maja Stahl, Leon Biermann, Andreas Nehring, and Hen-ning Wachsmuth. 2024. Exploring LLM prompting strategies for joint essay scoring and feedback gen-eration. In Proceedings of the 19th Workshop on Innovative Use of NLP for Building Educational Ap-plications (BEA 2024) , pages 283–298, Mexico City, Mexico. Association for Computational Linguistics. Keita Umejima, Takuya Ibaraki, Takahiro Yamazaki, and Kuniyoshi L Sakai. 2021. Paper notebooks vs. mobile devices: Brain activation differences during memory retrieval. Frontiers in Behavioral Neuro-science , 15:634158. Angelina Wang, Sayash Kapoor, Solon Barocas, and Arvind Narayanan. 2024. Against predictive opti-mization: On the legitimacy of decision-making al-gorithms that optimize predictive accuracy. ACM J. Responsib. Comput. , 1(1). Ryan Yixiang Wang, Matthew Finlayson, Luca Soldaini, Swabha Swayamdipta, and Robin Jia. 2025. Teach-ing models to understand (but not generate) high-risk data. In Second Conference on Language Modeling .Niall Winters, Rebecca Eynon, Anne Geniets, James Robson, and Ken Kahn. 2020. Can we avoid dig-ital structural violence in future learning systems? 

Learning, Media and Technology , 45(1):17–30. Yibo Yan, Jiamin Su, Jianxiang He, Fangteng Fu, Xu Zheng, Yuanhuiyi Lyu, Kun Wang, Shen Wang, Qingsong Wen, and Xuming Hu. 2025. A survey of mathematical reasoning in the era of multimodal large language model: Benchmark, method & chal-lenges. In Findings of the Association for Computa-tional Linguistics: ACL 2025 , pages 11798–11827, Vienna, Austria. Association for Computational Lin-guistics. Xinyan Yu, Sewon Min, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Han-naneh Hajishirzi. 2023. CREPE: Open-domain ques-tion answering with false presuppositions. In Pro-ceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Associa-tion for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 10457–10480, Toronto, Canada. As-sociation for Computational Linguistics. Renrui Zhang, Dongzhi Jiang, Yichi Zhang, Haokun Lin, Ziyu Guo, Pengshuo Qiu, Aojun Zhou, Pan Lu, Kai-Wei Chang, Yu Qiao, Peng Gao, and Hongsheng Li. 2024. MATHVERSE: Does your multi-modal LLM truly see the diagrams in visual math problems? In Computer Vision – ECCV 2024: 18th European Conference, Milan, Italy, September 29–October 4, 2024, Proceedings, Part VIII , page 169–186, Berlin, Heidelberg. Springer-Verlag. 

12 A Model Performance by Question Type 

In the main text, Figure 3 shows that the gap in VLM performance between erroneous and non-erroneous student responses is primarily driven by content description QA. Figure 10 expands upon that finding, by disaggregating content description QA’s overall pattern into finer-grained question categories and showing results for all 11 VLMs. Across these expanded plots, we see that the perfor-mance gap between erroneous and non-erroneous student responses persists across finer-grained con-tent description QA categories. 

## B Language Model-Assisted Data Annotation 

For each LM-assisted labeling task, we iteratively developed prompts that yield solid performance on small samples, before validating our final prompts on larger samples. The main text details the perfor-mance of each prompt on the intended task. 

B.1 Student Error 

One of our main findings, F1 , pertains to how mod-els perform differently between student responses that contain errors versus those that do not. To determine whether a student response contains an error or not, we rely on teachers’ free-form de-scriptions of student error. Since teachers’ written responses may span a variety of phrasings, we use GPT-5-mini to decisively label whether the teacher indicates that the student response contains an er-ror. Here, ans is the teacher’s answer to the ques-tion, What errors does the student make in their response? We use the following prompt:     

> When asked about what errors a student makes in their response to a math problem, a teacher writes, '{ans} '. Based on the teacher 's feedback, does the student make any error? Respond 'yes 'or 'no '.

B.2 Finer-grained Correctness & Error Questions 

In §8.1, we discuss how correctness & error QA span both binary assessments of specific student errors and more-open-ended questions. We use GPT-5-mini as an annotator to label whether each Correctness & Error question is binary or other .We use the following prompt:     

> Is the following question a binary question that asks whether a student does something correctly or not? Question: '{question} '
> Decide whether the question above is a binary question that judges a student 'scorrectness. Your response should start with 'Yes 'or 'No ':

B.3 Binary Student Correctness 

In §8.2, we’re interested in investigating whether models tend to under- or over-report student er-ror on binary correctness & error questions. We use GPT-5-mini to annotate whether binary QA’s questions and gold answers indicate that student is correct or incorrect. We use the following prompt:   

> Teacher A is examining a student 'ssolution to a math problem. Teacher B asks Teacher A, '{question} '
> Teacher A says, '{answer} '.Does this exchange indicate that the student 's solution has an error? Respond "yes" or "no":

## C Natural Language Description Experiments 

In §7, we investigate whether the inclusion of tex-tual descriptions of students’ work can support VLMs’ abilities to make higher-level inferences around students’ correctness and errors. 

C.1 Prompts 

Our prompt that adds in natural language descrip-tions/captions is intuitive and simple: 

> Description of image: {caption} Answer the following question: {question}

To generate descriptions or captions using lan-guage models, we use the following prompt: 

Describe the Student Response on the right side of the image in one paragraph. 

## D Additional Correctness & Error Results 

The relative performance ranking of binary ,

other , and generic correctness & error QA is consistent across all 11 VLMs (Figure 9). 13 Figure 9: VLMs’ performance across different subtypes of correctness & error questions, as defined in §8.1. 

14 Figure 10: An expanded version of Figure 3, showing which question categories contribute to the gap in VLM performance between student responses that contain errors versus those that do not. Questions below the dotted line in each subplot are content description QA. 

15